--- Page 1 ---
Wendi L. Adamek THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF
THE GIVEN:
REPRESENTATIONS OF
MERIT AND EMPTINESS
IN MEDIEVAL CHINESE
BUDDHISM
Medieval Chinese Buddhist merit discourse and donor practices constitute
a diverse and fertile field that awaits comprehensive study. In this article,
I take up several quite different examples of representations of merit in
order to elucidate relationships among notions of gift, emptiness, salvific
images, and commemoration of the deceased. Let me first summarize
the Buddhist soteriology linking these concepts. One of the fundamental
tenets of Buddhism is the notion that good deeds earn “merit” (punya)
that will negate the effects of past evil deeds and lead to beneficial future
conditions, especially good rebirth. Generous giving (dana), especially
giving support to monks and nuns, is the paradigmatic merit-gaining
practice. In terms of the Mahayana (Greater Vehicle) doctrine of the Two
Truths, the practice of generosity and the accumulation of merit belong
to the truth of “provisional means” relative to the absolute truth of empti-
ness/interdependence. At the same time, in Mahayana contexts generosity
is construed as one of the perfections practiced by bodhisattvas on their
path to ultimate Buddhahood, and both lay and ordained devotees can
aspire to this path.1
1This ideal picture has been readjusted somewhat since the publication of Jan Nattier’s
study of the exclusionary and extremist tendencies in some early Mahayana scriptures; see A
Few Good Men: The Bodhisattva Path according to “The Inquiry of Ugra (Ugrapariprccha)”
(Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2003).
ç 2005 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved.
0018-2710/2005/4502-0003$10.00

--- Page 2 ---
136 Representations of Merit
In Chinese Buddhism, the soteriology of representations of salvific
figures also reflects the Two Truths doctrine of provisional/absolute truth
and duality/nonduality. On the provisional level of apparent duality, de-
votion to Buddhas and bodhisattvas and to images representing them
elicits a response, moving the salvific figure to deploy the power of his/
her merit as upaya, skillful means, in order to relieve the sufferings of the
devotee. The ultimate aim of upaya is to bring all beings to the realiza-
tion of emptiness/nonduality, the lack of inherent self-identity, and the
interdependence of all phenomena. According to this soteriology, images
and the salvific figures they represent are similarly virtual—they are
conditional and ultimately illusory manifestations created for the sake of
illusion-bound “virtual” sufferers. However, the apparently localized and
provisional nature of images and merit refers to their nonlocalized, abso-
lute nature, and vice versa. This recursivity is what makes merit transfer
possible and desirable. Giving a gift to the Buddhist Sa“gha (community
of the ordained) and then dedicating the merit for the benefit of others,
the donor compounds provisional merit into inexhaustible merit. This is
accomplished through appealing to the meditation of a Buddha or bodhi-
sattva, who enables the devotee to sow seeds of individual merit in the
universal merit field, and also deploys the inexhaustible universal merit
field in order to benefit the devotee and his/her family.
Merit practice is concerned with giving bodies in various ways. It sus-
tains the deceased and their fortunate rebirth, and it is the substance and
function of the salvific bodies manifested by Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
In Chan (Zen) discourse, merit is the Dharmakaya (body of the law, ulti-
mate reality) and its realization in Buddha nature. In relation to images,
merit is the power inherent in the Buddhist image as well as the desired
product of its creation. To explore this family of traces, I make use of
widely disparate materials: Pali scriptures, a Chinese exegetical treatise,
Chinese Buddhist paintings and inscriptions, a Chan memorial eulogy, and
also a eulogy written by the late Jacques Derrida.
In the first section of this article, “Merit and Gift,” I discuss the ten-
sion between the foundational Buddhist teachings of no-self and non-
attachment and the equally foundational teaching that the laity gain merit
by supporting the Sa“gha. The next section, “Mahayana and Merit Trans-
fer,” explores a Chinese synthesis of doctrines of merit and merit transfer
in key Mahayana scriptures. Compiled by the Buddhist exegete Huiyuan
(523–592), this synthesis is a good example of ways that merit prac-
tices were both upheld and circumscribed through reference to the authori-
tative Mahayana doctrines of emptiness and the Two Truths. “Merit and
Images,” the third section, concerns donor inscriptions on three painting
scrolls that were recovered from the hidden storehouse at Dunhuang, in
northwest China. In a subsection, “Economies of Merit,” I discuss the re-

--- Page 3 ---
History of Religions 137
lationship between Buddhist economic practices and merit, with refer-
ence to the mediating function of the clergy and the notion of “symbolic
capital.” The fourth section, “‘No-Merit’ and Portrait Dharma,” concerns
the representation of a human figure as a manifestation of merit; I focus
on a portrait-eulogy for an eighth-century Chan master that evokes the
power of the master’s realization of emptiness and presents the image of
the master as a salvific manifestation.
In the last section, “The Image and the Work of Mourning,” I discuss
the representation and memorialization of the Chan master in relation to
Derrida’s reflections on the nature and functioning of the “work of mourn-
ing,” image, and gift. The notion of “the gift” has attracted much theoret-
ical attention in the fields of sociology and religious studies and has been
taken as a topic of deconstructive analysis by Derrida and others. Merit,
the quintessential “gift that keeps on giving,” is clearly a good place to
start thinking about connections between Buddhist and poststructuralist or
postmodern discourse on giving. A simple structural opposition animates
my ongoing inquiries into poststructuralist discourse on the gift: for Bud-
dhists, merit/gift is sustained by emptiness, while for Derrida, giving is
lost in aporia. Derrida argues that the gift, like immediate experience or
“self-presence,” is annulled by recognition of it as such.2 Pure giving is
impossible because of the giver’s awareness of him/herself as giving.
In terms of Derridean différence, the Buddhist experience of the non-
duality of subject and object would be held to be similarly impossible
and self-delusional. In other contexts, he deconstructs the Heideggerian
notion, possibly Buddhist influenced, of the experiencing of pure Being or
self-presence as itself. For Derrida, experiencing and what is experienced
can never be united in a self-identical essence—experience and meaning
are possible only because of differentiation and deferment, the endless
opening of signification to otherness and what is in excess of itself, and
therefore the lack of essence, center, or totality. Derridean deconstruction
at times appears to resemble the methods of certain Buddhists, particularly
the Madhyamika dialectician Nagarjuna. However, according to the terms
of deconstruction, the liberative experience of the totality of the simulta-
neous interdependence and relativity of all things is impossible.
Derrida’s meditation on this impossibility is related to his questioning
of writing and memory. As experience can only be grasped in the act of
auto-inscription referring to its own gesture of reference, likewise memory
is a trace, not of some “one” but of absence of one, a reference to the
ongoing differentiation of self from others. But it also refers to differ-
entiation from oneself, from other selves that are actively forgotten. In
2Jacques Derrida, Given Time: I. Counterfeit Money, trans. Peggy Kamuf (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1992), 12.

--- Page 4 ---
138 Representations of Merit
considering various writings and images that were created to commemorate
and benefit the living and the dead, I have tried to elucidate the interplay
of the impossible and the given in these traces of emptiness and merit.
The apparent analogies between Buddhist emptiness and the Derridean
“impossible” invites mutual appropriation and mutual deconstruction,
and this invitation has inspired a small but growing body of scholarship.3
Deconstructive analysis of the work of misrecognition and desire in the
functioning of gift and memory does, like Buddhist analysis of emptiness,
point to the lack of any self-identical gift-act, giver, or recipient. How-
ever, postmodern aporia cannot point to a safe place for one’s deceased
parents, teachers, children, or siblings, while Buddhist affirmation of the
ultimate nonduality of merit and emptiness creates the adamantine given
upon which donors can confidently inscribe their names and the names of
their loved ones. In other words, deconstruction and various types of
Buddhist analyses may bring one to realization of the self-contradictions
inherent in the epistemological structures that create one’s lived reality.
Though both may demonstrate that there is no reality corresponding to
one’s experience, Buddhists can assert that the merit and compassion of
the Buddhas and bodhisattvas enables them to create a provisional after-
life “realm” or effect. (As lived reality is also an effect, there is no on-
tological divide—indeed, no ontology.)
Robert Glass comments on those who see postmodernism and Buddhism
as allies in providing insight into the interdependent or relational nature
of self/reality: “They have moved away from independent existence only
to rest in mutual existence. However, there is no resting place or mutuality
in the endless deferral of deconstruction, and this is the whole point.
Whether the place is ‘words beyond words’ or ‘images beyond images,’
both are illusions which bar honest acknowledgment of the infinite ne-
gation of negation. For Indra’s Net to be postmodern, there needs to be a
rip or tear in the net.”4 I agree with Glass that the difference between
Derridean impossibility (endless deferral) and Buddhist emptiness (mu-
tuality) is irremediable, and yet once it has been put into play this differ-
ence is itself a trace deferring to the mutual reference of aporia and merit
as much as to their irreconcilability.
3Examples include Bernard Faure, Double Exposure: Cutting across Buddhist and Western
Discourses, trans. Janet Lloyd (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2004); Robert
Newman Glass, “Splits and Gaps in Buddhism and Postmodern Theology,” Journal of the
American Academy of Religion 63, no. 2 (1995): 303–19; David Loy, ed., Healing Decon-
struction: Postmodern Thought in Buddhism and Christianity (New York: Oxford University
Press, 196); and Robert Magliola, On Deconstructing Life-Worlds: Buddhism, Christianity,
Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997).
4Robert Newman Glass, review of Healing Deconstruction, by David Loy, and On De-
constructing Life-Worlds, by Robert Magliola, Journal of Buddhist Ethics 5 (1998): 62.

--- Page 5 ---
History of Religions 139
merit and gift
Let me begin by considering the more conventional interdependencies
involved in donor inscription. Commissioning the production of Buddhist
images, bells, stupas, and shrines; commissioning, copying, and reciting
scripture; and supporting the community of the ordained—all these gain
merit for the donor, mitigating future conditions in this life and the next.
Activities centered on objects, scripture, and support are said to sow the
“merit fields” of Buddha, Dharma (teaching/law), and Sa“gha, respec-
tively. In subsequent sections I will focus on activity of the first type, the
making of images, but in early Buddhist scriptures the most typical donor
activity depicted is support of the monastic community.
The relationship between individual donors and the collective Sa“gha
has been a major factor in the development of Buddhism, carrying its
ways and means through many centuries and countries, and yet it has fre-
quently been a target of criticism from Buddhists and non-Buddhists
alike. At the heart of this powerful and contested relationship is the prob-
lem of the personal. The fundamental Buddhist teachings of no-self and
nonattachment, and later the Mahayana teaching of the emptiness of gift,
giver, and recipient, are conveyed through scriptural settings in which
the tension between personal relationships and liberation are resolved in
favor of liberation. However, in some scriptures and in the Vinayas (rules
of conduct for the ordained), it is acknowledged that monks’ and nuns’
dependence on gifts for survival can create personal ties with the donors,
which are to be annulled by repaying the debt with the universal and im-
personal currency—merit.
In the Dakkhinavibhanga-sutta (The exposition of offerings) we find
Ananda arguing with his cousin the Buddha that he should accept a per-
sonal gift from their aunt: “Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept
the new pair of cloths from Mahapajapati Gotami. Mahapajapati Gotami
has been very helpful to the Blessed One, venerable sir. As his mother’s
sister, she was his nurse, his foster mother, the one who gave him milk
when his own mother died. The Blessed One too has been very helpful to
Mahapajapati Gotami, venerable sir. It is owing to the Blessed One that
Mahapajapati Gotami has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma,
and the Sa“gha.”5
To this the Buddha replies, “That is so, Ananda, that is so! When one
person, owing to another, has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma,
5Dakkhinavibhanga Sutta (The exposition of offerings), Majjhima Nikaya (hereafter MN)
III 253, 3, in The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A New Translation of the Maj-
jhima Nikaya, trans. Bhikkhu Nanamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi (Boston: Wisdom Publications,
1995), 1102–6.

--- Page 6 ---
140 Representations of Merit
and the Sa“gha, I say that it is not easy for the former to repay the latter.”6
Note that the Buddha claims that the balance of obligation is on the side
of Mahapajapati, for he has repaid the transitory “milk debt” that sustained
his infant body with the inestimable Triple Gem, which offers liberation
from rebirth.7
The Buddha then expostulates on personal offerings to an individual
versus offerings to the Sa“gha. Regarding individual offerings, it is said
that the rewards of making an offering to an animal repay a hundredfold,
and so on up the chain of beings to offerings to a stream entrant, which re-
pays immeasurably. Beyond the level of stream entrant and up to the final
level of a gift to a Tathagata, the incalculable reward is inexpressible:
“What should be said about giving a gift to a Tathagata, accomplished
and fully enlightened?”8 However, gifts to the collective Sa“gha are ex-
tolled in a passage that concludes with the assertion, “And I say that in
no way does a gift to a person individually ever have greater fruit than an
offering made to the Sa“gha.”9
Thus the merit gained from personal gifts to the Tathagata is inexpress-
ibly incalculable, but this immeasurability is yet somehow less than the
results of giving to the collective Sa“gha. Moreover, the recipient of the
Dharma cannot repay the obligation incurred by having received the gift
of refuge and the ending of suffering, for that debt is also incalculable.
Rather, the individual donor to the Buddha and Sa“gha receives the
opportunity to sow the seeds of future incalculable reward. While it is
too simplistic to reduce this to the calculus of institutional self-interest,
neither can one convincingly defend the Buddhist rhetoric of merit and
debt as transparent and benign.10
Oliver Freiberger, in his “Profiling the Sa“gha: Institutional and
Non-Institutional Tendencies in Early Buddhist Teachings,” points to a
countervailing soteriology of merit in certain Pali scriptures, in which the
individual dispositions of both donor and recipient determine the efficacy
6MN III 254, 4, in Nanamoli and Bodhi, trans., The Middle Length Discourses of the
Buddha, 1103.
7The notion of the Buddha-Dharma as a repayment for the “milk debt” owed to mothers
by their children is discussed by Alan Cole in his Mothers and Sons in Chinese Buddhism
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998).
8MN III 255, 6, in Nanamoli and Bodhi, trans., The Middle Length Discourses of the
Buddha, 1104.
9MN III 256, 8, in Nanamoli and Bodhi, trans., The Middle Length Discourses of the
Buddha, 1105.
10For examples of studies that stress institutional self-interest in medieval Chinese
Buddhism, see Jacques Gernet, Buddhism in Chinese Society: An Economic History from
the Fifth to the Tenth Centuries, trans. Franciscus Verellen (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1995); and Cole, Mothers and Sons in Chinese Buddhism.
One Line Short

--- Page 7 ---
History of Religions 141
of the gift.11 The recipient qualifies as an ideal merit field due to his/her
own ascesis and not to his/her status as a representative of the Sa“gha,
and there are even passages that recommend the efficaciousness of gifts
to non-Buddhist ascetics. Freiberger cites an A“guttara Nikaya passage
regarding the “sixfold-endowed offering,” which stresses the individual
merits of the giver and recipient over their differential religious roles:
“What is the giver’s threefold part? Herein, bhikkhus (monks), before the
gift he is glad at heart; in giving the mind is calmed; and he is delighted
when he has given. And what is the recipients’ threefold part? Herein,
bhikkhus, the recipients are free from craving, hatred, and delusion, or
they strive to put an end to craving, hatred, and delusion.”12
Freiberger’s observations are supported by James Egge’s recent book,
Religious Giving and the Invention of Karma in Theravada Buddhism.13
Egge argues that the Pali scriptures contain two distinct rhetorical patterns
regarding gift giving, which he characterizes as being based on theories
of sacrifice (yañña) and theories of karma, respectively. He demonstrates
that these discourses were antithetical enough to require later exegetical
effort in order to establish the ascendancy of karmic soteriology. The above
passage from the Dakkhinavibhanga-sutta illustrates a karmic ideology:
giving to the Sa“gha is categorically the most karmically rewarding, and
the donor’s intention to give to the Sa“gha automatically carries a karmic
result. Conversely, discourse based on sacrifice is reflected in the above
passage from the A“guttara Nikaya, in which the dispositions of both
donor and recipient affect the degree of reward. Works that retain traces
of sacrificial ideology also tend to lay more stress on the dedication of
the offering (daksina) and the practices of abstinence of both donor and
recipient.
In considering the significance of institutional categories and individual
dispositions in the soteriologies of merit, it is important to keep in mind
that the individual donor was just as likely or even more likely to have
been a monk or a nun, both in India and in China.14 Theoretically, the
11Compare A“guttara Nikaya (hereafter AN) I 161,13–16; MN I 379,16–18; AN IV 185,
22–24; cited in Oliver Freiberger, “Profiling the Sa“gha: Institutional and Non-institutional
Tendencies in Early Buddhist Teachings,” Marburg Journal of Religion 5, no. 1 (2000): 1–6.
12AN III 336,16–22, in Freiberger, “Profiling the Sa“gha: Institutional and Non-
Institutional Tendencies in Early Buddhist Teachings,” 5. See also AN III 57.
13James Egge, Religious Giving and the Invention of Karma in Theravada Buddhism
(Richmond, Surrey: Curzon, 2002).
14For Indian examples, see Gregory Schopen, Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks (Hono-
lulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1997); for Chinese examples, see Hao Chunwen ,
“Guanyu Tang houqi wudai Song chu Shazhou seng-su de shishe wenti”
(Alms donations by monks and laymen in Sha prefecture during the
Later Tang, Five Dynasties, and Early Song), Tang yanjiu 3 (1997): 19–40.

--- Page 8 ---
142 Representations of Merit
Buddhist gift and its impersonal reward, merit, circulate in a system that
consists entirely of individual donors and no individual recipients or
reciprocators. Therefore, even giving to an unworthy monk is efficacious,
because he is resolved (and absolved of obligation) into the collective
Sa“gha. This extreme, though itself problematic, is a logical result of the
need to pull the Buddhist gift out of the matrix of personal obligation that
was both its model and its antithesis.
However, from the perspective of studies of social identity, the desire
both to uphold the law of obligation and to be absolved of debt is one of
the driving forces of social organization, in relation to which the Buddhist
escape route is mere epiphenomenon. Studies of gift-giving practices in a
wide range of social contexts (such as the studies by Malinowski, Mauss,
and their heirs and critics) show that the personal quality is recognized
to be both necessary and dangerous to the functioning of the circuit of
giving. Recognition of the danger of the personal is evident precisely in
its “misrecognition,” its transmutation into collective representation. Let
us consider Mauss’s now-classic statement on the system of the gift: “Ma-
terial and moral life, and exchange, function within it [i.e., the system of
the gift] in a form that is both disinterested and obligatory. Moreover,
this obligation is expressed in a mythical and imaginary way or, one might
say, symbolic and collective. It assumes an aspect that centers on the in-
terest attached to the things exchanged. These are never completely de-
tached from those carrying out the exchange. The mutual ties and alliance
that they establish are comparatively indissoluble.”15
Mauss’s essay on the gift revolves around the conundrum of free and
obligatory exchange, on the power by which things circulate through
“total” or undifferentiated social phenomena (at once religious, political,
moral, familial) that characterize so-called primitive societies. Although
his work has come to symbolize his simplest proposition, namely, that
what goes by the name of gift is really exchange, throughout his essay it
is the intermingling of self-interest, collective interest, and disinterest that
provides a motivating force for both the social dynamics that he interprets
and for his interpretive quest.
His evocation of a “power in the object” (the Maori hau), that (imper-
sonally) impels reciprocity, was criticized by Levi-Strauss as recourse to
mystification and uncooked indigenous theory.16 Nevertheless, let us look
once more at Mauss’s intuition that “souls are mixed with things; things
15Marcel Mauss, The Gift, trans. W. D. Halls (New York: Norton, 1990), 33.
16Claude Lévi-Strauss, Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss, trans. Felicity Baker
(London: Routledge, 1950), 47–50. See also Marshall Sahlins, “The Spirit of the Gift,” in
The Logic of the Gift: Toward an Ethic of Generosity, ed. Alan Schrift (New York: Rout-
ledge, 1997), 70–95.

--- Page 9 ---
History of Religions 143
with souls”17 in an incalculable social, economic, and sacred flux of ex-
change: “In all this there is a succession of rights and duties to consume
and reciprocate, corresponding to rights and duties to offer and accept.
Yet this intricate mingling of symmetrical and contrary rights and duties
ceases to appear contradictory if, above all, one grasps that mixture of
spiritual ties between things that to some degree appertain to the soul, and
individuals, and groups that to some extent treat one another as things.”18
In a Buddhist rendering of this economy, the spiritual ties between
things, between gift and merit, yields personal benefits (including salva-
tion) for oneself and one’s loved ones. The Sa“gha, on the other hand, is
reified as a receptacle of offerings so that the donor may exercise his or
her right to generate merit. However, donors and Sa“gha, treating each
other as things and dealing with things that are tied to the soul, depend on
karma rather than obligation to maintain balanced scales. The challenge
for the scholar of sacred objects and sacred rhetoric is to see with a kind
of double vision both the ideally balanced and the personally weighted
scales.
mah y na and merit transfer
A A
Gregory Schopen, working with early Buddhist inscriptions and Vinayas,
has demonstrated that merit dedication for the benefit of deceased family
members by laypeople, monks, and nuns was a flourishing aspect of
pre-Mahayana Buddhism.19 Nevertheless, here I will focus on practices
grounded in Mahayana soteriology, as this was the prevailing context in
which merit practices were received in China. Key Mahayana sutras, such
as the Saddharmapundarika and the Avatamsaka, promoted the notion
that the cosmic Buddhas and bodhisattvas use the power of merit gained
through eons of good deeds in order to save beings—which earns them
further merit. Their merit is thus inexhaustible, and this enables them to de-
ploy upaya, skillful means, adapting the salvific Dharma to the receptive
capacities of various kinds of beings. According to this schema, merit,
including the merit gained by copying and spreading such scriptures, was
foremost among the conventional skillful means through which beings
were ultimately saved. Furthermore, as propounded in the Nirvana and
Avatamsaka sutras, the perfection (paramita) of generous giving enabled
the devotee to make progress on the bodhisattva path.
An excellent compendium of key Mahayana tenets, including merit and
merit transfer, was compiled by Huiyuan (523–592), a monk who
lived during the Northern Zhou and Sui dynasties. His Dasheng
17Mauss, The Gift, 20.
18Ibid., 14.
19Schopen, Bones, Stones, and Buddhist Monks, 56–71.

--- Page 10 ---
144 Representations of Merit
yi zhang (Chapters on the meaning of Mahayana)20 draws on the
translations of Dharmaksema (385–433) and others, and he cate-
gorizes Mahayana doctrines according to principles such as numerical
groups and the structure of the bodhisattva path. He was especially in-
fluenced by the Nirvana-sutra, and a number of his sections are abstracts,
with explications, of various portions of that sutra.
Through Huiyuan’s work we may thus understand something of the
hermeneutics through which concepts of merit and merit transfer were
received in early medieval China. Huiyuan follows time-honored Chinese
exegetical practice, selecting and organizing source passages according to
an overall schema modeled after authoritative texts and made intelligible
through the author’s commentary. This approach can also be seen in two
better-known medieval compendia of Buddhist practices, the Mohe zhi-
guan (The great cessation and insight), T. 46 (1911), and the
Fayuan zhulin (Jade grove of the Dharma garden), T. 53 (2122).
Much of Huiyuan’s work consists of outlines of scriptural sources and is
full of technical terms and doctrines, as we will see. However, his com-
mentary often appears to address a lay or mixed audience, as he argues
for the effectiveness of Mahayana practices in addressing immediate as
well as ultimate concerns. Here I will give abridged accounts of his sec-
tions on merit and merit transfer. First I will outline the sections on merit
in the fourteenth fascicle, which is concerned with doctrinal tenets that
are comprised of ten items, following the numerical principle of organi-
zation used in some early Buddhist scriptures. Then I turn to sections on
merit in the ninth fascicle, which are organized according to the Two
Truths hermeneutic.
In his preface to the section on merit in the fourteenth fascicle,
Huiyuan gives an explanatory abstract of the ten merits discussed in the
Nirvana-sutra.21 He glosses the term “merit” (gongde ) into two parts:
gong is gongneng , the function or power that enables beings to attain
nirvana, and this power derives from practice of the virtues, de , the
paramitas or perfections cultivated by bodhisattvas. He then goes on to
detail the ten kinds of merit, as follows: (1) the entrance to wisdom, which
is the merit of hearing the teachings and being able to cultivate them to
the level of realization of Buddha nature; (2) the arising of powers, con-
stituting the superknowledges and supernormal powers; (3) the immeasur-
able, unconditional compassion of the bodhisattvas, benefiting all beings;
(4) the “ten benefits and results,” a lengthy sublist of karmic results that
first establishes the bases of the path—a bodhisattva’s “root” or karmic
20T. 44 (1851) = Taisho shinshu daizokyo (Taisho Buddhist canon [here-
after, T.]), 85 vols. (Tokyo: Daizo shuppan kai, 1922–33), vol. 44 (no. 1851).
21Daban niepan jing ([Mahapari]nirvana-sutra), T. 12 (374), trans. Dhar-
maksema (385–433).
One Line Long

--- Page 11 ---
History of Religions 145
disposition, and the bodhisattva vow—and then enumerates the types of
actions and results. The principal types of actions and results that are pre-
sented are cultivation of the field of merit through giving with equanimity,
maintenance of the precepts, practice of the ten virtuous acts and avoid-
ance of the ten evil deeds, retribution causing births in lower realms (in-
cluding hell), understanding that cause and effect are ultimately empty,
the eight kinds of intolerable demons, and the repudiation of karmic
proclivities.
The list of ten merits then continues with (5) the five rewards (of which
we might note especially the fourth, “reverently making offerings on be-
half of all beings, human and divine”); (6) the mind that is spontaneous
and self-present (zizai ), also called the vajrasamadhi (adamantine
meditation); (7) cultivation (of the path) as the appropriate treatment (of
the illness of existence): (8) the eight prescriptions for successful treat-
ment, including six mindfulnesses (one of which is mindfulness of gen-
erosity), five dhyanas (meditative absorptions), the mind of bodhi,22 and
ultimate truth; (9) the correct path of cultivation—this section includes a
definition of belief (xin ), with “belief in the rewards of generous giving”
listed as one of the definitive types of belief, along with belief in the Triple
Gem, the Two Truths, and skillful means. The last type of merit listed is
(10) “the culmination of the correct path,” for which Huiyuan refers us to
an overview given in a subsequent chapter.23
The corresponding passage on merit transfer in the fourteenth fascicle
discusses the ten designations of merit transfer from the Avantamsaka-
sutra.24 Merit-transfer, huixiang , is glossed as follows: hui, to return
to reverse direction (to nirvana) is what the good Dharma tends toward
(xiang). The ten designations of merit transfer are (1) the merit transfer
that delivers beings from the tendency to return to rebirths—it is merit
transfer that enables bodhisattvas practicing the perfections to free beings
22In context, “the mind of bodhi” (puti zhi xin) should not be regarded as bodhicitta, the
initiation of the path. Rather, it is number five in a list of eight cultivations, as follows: “the
‘one thing to be guarded,’ known as the mind of bodhi” (shouyishizhe, wei puti zhi xin
). Furthermore, regarding the term shouyi, in other sections Huiyuan
discusses it and jianxing (seeing the nature) within their scriptural contexts as items in
the classification of the elements of the bodhisattva path. In the eighth century, both of these
terms would be used to represent the timelessness or simultaneity of practice and ultimate
realization. However, in Southern School Chan polemics they were made into oppositional
symbols: shouyi was said to be an instance of the deluded gradual view of practice, while
jianxing was said to be the correct “sudden” practice/realization. Huiyuan also discusses
“sudden and gradual,” interpreting them, in accord with the Two Truths hermeneutic, as two
perspectives of the same “path” rather than two different types of approach; T. 44 (1851)
643b. The refashioning of these terms in polemical Southern School discourse parallels the
creation of a polemical context for the notion of merit, which will be further discussed in the
final section of this article.
23Dasheng yi zhang, T. 44 (1851) 751b–753b.
24Da fangguang fo huayan jing ([Buddha]avatamsaka-sutra), T. 9 (278),
trans. Buddhabhadra (359–429).

--- Page 12 ---
146 Representations of Merit
from the sufferings caused by defilements and establish them in bodhi;
(2) the merit transfer of incorruptible faith; (3) the bodhisattva’s vow to
perfect merit transfer equal to that of all Buddhas of past, present, and
future. The next two items are particularly pertinent for donor practices.
Item (4) is the universal efficacy of the power of merit transfer, which
causes good roots to “reach everywhere,” that is, to be like reality, omni-
present. The bodhisattva’s cultivation of good roots functions as merit
transfer, and the power of merit transfer causes good roots to extend.
This is what enables inexhaustible offerings to extend to Buddha, Dharma,
and Sa“gha, complete cultivation to extend to all paths, complete fulfill-
ment to extend to all karmic results, complete adornments to extend to all
Buddha lands, complete conversion to extend to all beings, and complete
understanding to extend to all dharmas (constituents of reality). Item (5) is
the inexhaustible store of merit, wujin gongde zang : by solic-
iting the inexhaustible merit of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, one is able
to accomplish the good roots of inexhaustible merit. The list of types of
merit transfer continues with (6) furthering the firm establishment of
good roots, whereby the good roots initiated by the cultivation of giving,
and so forth, are made obdurate due to the protection of the Buddhas;
(7) equally furthering all beings, whereby the merit of the bodhisattva’s
good roots equally benefits all; (8) the characteristics of suchness (ru ,
tathata), whereby all kinds of good roots and merit transfers are grounded
in the characteristics of ultimate reality; and (9) “nonbound, nonattached,
liberation”—that the mind of all dharmas is nongrasping is called non-
bound and nonattached, that the Dharma is spontaneous and self-present
is called liberation. Bodhisattvas do not waste good dharmas; by non-
attachment, and so forth, all good dharmas are transferred, so (for ex-
ample), when one solicits the bodhisattva Samantabhadra, the entirety of
the merit of Samantabhadra is available. Finally, item (10) extols the im-
measurable merit transfer of the Dharmadhatu (realm of the Dharma),
that which is ultimately sought and the reason that bodhisattvas transfer
their good roots. This completes the discussion on the ten designations of
merit transfer. The designations are followed by the division of merit
transfer into three categories of efficacy (i.e., resulting from the good
roots of beings and bodhisattvas, and from the good Dharma of ultimate
reality). The section ends with a visualization sequence focused on the
bodhisattva Jin’gangchuang (Gaganagañja) in Tusita heaven.25
25Dasheng yi zhang, T. 44 (851) 748b–749b. Jin’gangchuang is one of the sixteen great
bodhisattvas, enumerated in the Siyifantian suo wen jing (Vi¶esacinta-
brahmapariprccha), T. 15 (586) (cf. 585 and 587), and other scriptures. Jin’gangchuang also
designates one of the forms taken by Ksitigarbha (Dizang ) to save beings in the six
paths, but in this case parallel visualization sequences in other sections make it clear that
Huiyuan was referring to the sixteen bodhisattvas scheme.
One Line Long

--- Page 13 ---
History of Religions 147
In both of these sections from the fourteenth fascicle, we see merit and
merit transfer presented in the context of the bodhisattva path, which pro-
vides the background for an appealing portrayal of the inexhaustible bene-
fits of the cultivation of good deeds and the practice of merit transfer,
with just a few dark hints of the consequences of bad deeds. Especially
in items (4) and (5) in the section on merit transfer, we are shown the
capitalization economics of inexhaustible merit: by drawing on the in-
exhaustible merit store of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, one is able to
produce one’s own “good roots” of merit, which can be dedicated for
the benefit of others and thereby compounded and extended.26 Thus,
“merit” represents the ideal of perpetual increase of the good (and goods)
through circulation, the principle of “yield” or productiveness that Mar-
shall Sahlins claims is the real significance of the Maori hau.27
However, in the ninth fascicle of the Dasheng yi zhang, the ultimate
background of the bodhisattva path becomes the foreground, and the
worldly benefits and protections afforded by the system of merit are
explicitly relegated to a subordinate position. In this fascicle, outlined
below, Huiyuan discusses merit and merit transfer according to the Two
Truths hermeneutic, emphasizing that the only real benefit of merit prac-
tice is realization, ultimate truth. I have reversed the order of Huiyuan’s
chapters (which are not necessarily related) by presenting the karmic
benefits in the fourteenth fascicle first and the ultimate perspective in the
ninth fascicle second, because the question of the ultimate meaning of
merit will be taken up in a subsequent discussion of the paradigmatic
Chan position on merit.
In the ninth fascicle of the Dasheng yi zhang, the discussion of merit
occurs in the section on “the two kinds of adornment (zhuangyan ).”
The “two kinds of adornment” are the Two Truths, conventional and ul-
timate, in this case merit (gongde or fude ), and wisdom (zhihui
, prajña). The terms fude and gongde indicate that good deeds have
the efficacy (gongneng ) to enhance the welfare (fuli ) of the
practitioner, and that welfare is the intrinsic virtue (jiade ) of good
practices. The term zhihui indicates the two aspects of wisdom: the func-
tioning of awareness (zhaojian ) and also the knowledge (zhi ,
jñana) of conventional truth are called zhi, while complete apprehension
(jieliao ) and also illuminating or experiencing (zhao ) ultimate
truth are called hui.
Huiyuan analyzes the path schemes in four scriptures28 and endorses that
of the Nirvana-sutra, which assigns the first five perfections (paramitas)—
26Dasheng yi zhang, T. 44 (1851) 748c 12–24.
27Sahlins, “The Spirit of the Gift,” 81–83.
28Three of these works are translations attributed to Dharmaksema: the Youposaijie
jing (Upasakasila-sutra), T. 24 (1488); the Pusadichi jing (the

--- Page 14 ---
148 Representations of Merit
generosity, discipline, vigor, forbearance, and meditation—plus the phe-
nomenal aspect of wisdom, the sixth paramita, to the category of merit, all
on the conventional level. To the category of wisdom proper belongs only
the absolute aspect of wisdom, direct seeing of ultimate truth. Huiyuan
correlates the two levels with several other two-tiered rubrics, conclud-
ing with a discussion of essence (ti ) and function (yong ). Essence
refers to verifying nirvana, that is, experiencing ultimate truth, and func-
tion refers to practices that accord with cause and effect in the world, that
is, worldly benefits or merit Huiyuan quotes a Nirvana-sutra passage
stating that the latter, the adornment of merit, is conditioned, produces
outflows, karmic results, and hindrances, and is impermanent, while the
adornment of wisdom is the opposite. Further along, Huiyuan quotes an-
other Nirvana-sutra passage asserting that from the initiation of the path
up through the ninth bhumi (stage) of the ten-stage bodhisattva path the
aspirant does not directly perceive Buddha nature, and that all this is
“merit”—only direct perception is “wisdom.” Repeating a formula he
uses in other sections, Huiyuan concludes this section by saying that it is
not that ordinary practitioners of the two lower vehicles29 are without
wisdom, but it is hidden and not manifest. And it is not that the Buddhas
and bodhisattvas are without merit, but it is hidden and not expounded.30
The ninth fascicle also has its corresponding section on merit transfer,
which is construed as seeking absolute truth and not worldly benefits.
Merit transfer is discussed according to three rubrics: bodhi (enlighten-
ment), beings, and reality. “Merit transfer of bodhi” refers to the mind
that seeks wisdom, motivating one to transfer the good dharmas one has
cultivated and seek the virtues of bodhi. “Merit transfer of beings” is the
mind of profound mindfulness of beings, motivating one to transfer the
good dharmas one has cultivated and give them to others. “Merit transfer
of reality” refers to the mind that loathes the conditioned and seeks ulti-
mate reality. Huiyuan then makes a tripartite argument for the necessity of
each category of merit transfer. Without merit transfer of bodhi, the good
dharmas one cultivates would not be able to transcend the triple world,31
would be impermanent, and good deeds could not be increased limitlessly.
“Bodhisattvabhumi” section of the Yogacarabhumi-s3astra), T. 30 (1581); and the above-
mentioned Daban niepan jing, T. 12 (374). The fourth is the Mahaprajñaparamita-sutra,
probably the twenty-seven fascicle version, the translation of which is attributed to Kumara-
jiva (344–413), T. 8 (223).
29According to Mahayana soteriology, there are two vehicles inferior to that of the bodhi-
sattva: (1) the ¶ravaka, shengwen “hearer,” a designation for disciples of Hinayana, and
(2) the pratyekabuddha, yuanjue , “self-enlightened Buddha.”
30Dasheng yi zhang, T. 44 (1851) 649c–650c.
31“Triple-world” refers to the three levels or qualities of the mundane (including the
heavens): desire, form, and formlessness.

--- Page 15 ---
History of Religions 149
Without merit transfer of beings, beings would be attached to pleasure
and would be unable to adapt to conditions and benefit other beings; they
would seek extinction in nirvana and would be unable to bear staying in
the world to be merciful and beneficial to other beings; and the limited
benefit of their good deeds could not be limitlessly extended. Without
merit transfer of reality, beings would be attached to the good roots they
cultivate and would be unable to let them go; as the intrinsic nature of
dharmas is impermanent, the good produced does not abide until it is made
secure by accordance with the absolute. Cultivating the good for super-
ficial reasons is limited in scope, but through practicing in accord with
the absolute, good roots become boundless.32
Thus, Huiyuan maintains the hierarchy between the two levels of truth,
a conservative approach that is consistent with the message of the authori-
tative Mahayana scriptures he summarizes. However, over time the in-
fluence of the nondual hermeneutics of the Prajñaparamita-sutra (sutra
on the Perfection of Wisdom) resulted in an ever-more pervasive and
confident use of recursivity in Chinese Buddhist discourse on conditional
and ultimate. In a recursive view of the merit wisdom hierarchy, merit
practice is the function or immanence of the unconditioned, and wisdom
and merit produce each other, are empty/interdependent and inseparable.
Moreover, as this emptiness is the intrinsic Buddha nature of reality and
individual beings, the notion that the fulfillment of the path was thus im-
mediately given to realization would become the foundation of Chan/Zen
soteriology. In the eighth-century Platform Sutra, the Chan sixth patriarch
Huineng (638–713) is said to have preached, “Merit is in the Dharma-
kaya, not in the field of blessings (futian ). In Dharma-nature itself
there is merit (gongde ). [Seeing into your own nature is gong]; level
and direct mind is de. [Inwardly, see] the Buddha-nature, outwardly, prac-
tice reverence.”33
In the sudden-enlightenment understanding, maintained in Chan, every-
thing and nothing is merit. However, even the Platform-Sutra retained
conventional Buddhist forms (“practice reverence”) and avoided the anti-
nomian patch of quicksand on the shore of nonduality, where there appears
to be no distinction between good and evil. In the eighth and ninth cen-
turies, several Chan schools explored the edges of this dangerous area in
order to lay greater emphasis on recognition of innate Buddha nature and
claimed that all practices, including practices aimed at gaining merit, were
32Dasheng yi zhang, T. 44 (1851) 636a–637b.
33Philip Yampolsky, trans., The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1967), 156, with minor modifications. The portion in the first bracket is
Yampolsky’s emendation based on the Koshoji text; the portion in the second is an addition
considered necessary by D. T. Suzuki and subsequent editors.

--- Page 16 ---
150 Representations of Merit
a form of delusion. Thus, emphasis on the nonduality of merit and empti-
ness created a polemical rhetoric, according to which conventional merit
practices had no value whatsoever.
The “no merit” polemic will be taken up again in the fourth part of this
article, but let us return to Huiyuan’s treatise and conventional merit prac-
tices. In the ninth-fascicle section on merit transfer, Huiyuan addresses
an issue that was central to the popular practice of inscribing prayers for
merit transfer on donated objects, namely, “how does it work?” In order
to explain this, under the category of “merit-transfer of beings” Huiyuan
stages a hypothetical dialogue:
“The Buddha-Dharma holds that others do not receive the recompense of what
one has done, and one does not receive the fruition of what others have done.
How can the bodhisattvas transfer their own good dharmas and give them to
others? If they cannot be given, then how can others obtain the benefits?” The
Buddhist answers: “Although (what you say is true), it is not that ‘this’ and ‘that’
do not have a relationship of mutual aid; because of mutual aid, it is possible to
transfer one’s good [dharmas] to give to others. Because of merit-transfer, in
the future age one will not be abandoned. Benefiting beings also helps [the bodhi-
sattva] cultivate the good. Therefore, merit-transfer is necessary. Furthermore,
merit-transfer is what enables one’s family to be converted. Because of the
power of merit-transfer, in the future age, beings who have seen will reverently
receive the Dharma. This is the fruition of enabling one’s family to be converted.
Because one takes it upon oneself to practice and receive the Buddha-Dharma,
one needs merit-transfer in order to successfully enable one’s family to convert.”34
This point was clearly an important one for Huiyuan and for the
audience he had in mind. Though he alludes to the conventional scrip-
tural assurance that merit transfer is what maintains the bodhisattva’s
inexhaustible storehouse of merit for the benefit of all beings, it is the
benefit of conversion of one’s own family that he repeats three times. In
the following sections on donor inscriptions in Dunhuang paintings, we
will see that the doctrine of merit transfer and its inclusion of one’s
family in a beneficial circle were the foundations of a flourishing prac-
tice. The custom of including inscriptional and visual representations of
the donor’s family in a work of art was among the most widely dissemi-
nated of Buddhist practices, and in these portable paintings we enjoy the
rare privilege of seeing how donors who were not of the noblesse had
themselves portrayed.
merit and images
Buddhist images marked with donor inscriptions are in some ways
analogous to an important type of artifact of pre-Buddhist China, namely,
34Dasheng yi zhang, T. 44 (1851) 636c28–637a9.
One Line Long

--- Page 17 ---
History of Religions 151
Zhou bronze ritual vessels inscribed and dedicated with records of sac-
rifices and achievements in complex patterns and textures. Both types of
work derived their value from their function within an intricate system of
patterned gifting. Though the systems were different, both types of object
were intended to include the living and the dead in the circuit of merit
and memory. Moreover, the conjunction of writing and sacred object was
integral to the aesthetic merit that earned a transcendent “countergift.”
I have selected three examples of donor-inscribed paintings from among
the many resplendent ninth- and tenth-century paintings in the Stein col-
lection at the British Museum and the Pelliot collection at the Musée
Guimet.35 These materials were taken from Mogao cave 17 at Dun-
huang . Paintings of Buddhist images were given to temples in order
to commemorate and benefit deceased relatives, and both living and de-
ceased family members were often depicted in the paintings. Inscriptions
on the scrolls include prayers to transfer the merit that the donor had gained
through donation of the painting; this popular form of commemoration
was carried out by devotees of varied ethnicity, social status, and degree
of Buddhist affiliation, including monks and nuns. Commonly, these paint-
ings have a main image or images of salvific Buddhas and bodhisattvas
(often Avalokite¶vara and Kssitigarbha), with representations of the prin-
cipal donor and family members in a separate register at the bottom of the
painting. Representations of the donors range from unidentified stylized
images of a lay couple flanking the central image and holding offerings to
an array of figures with names and relationships inscribed in cartouches
adjacent to their images. Male and female donors are separated, but their
placement to the right or left of the image is not consistent. Longer in-
scriptions, if included, are usually in a central cartouche.36
k itigarbha as the lord of the six ways
S
The first image I will discuss is a painting of Ksitigarbha as the Lord of
the Six Ways, dated 963 (see fig. 1).37 The bodhisattva Ksitigarbha is
shown seated, wearing the distinctive patterned head kerchief that appears
frequently in Dunhuang representations of him in his role as afterlife
mediator. He is flanked by two attendant bodhisattvas, with scenes of the
35Reproductions are found in Roderick Whitfield, Art of Central Asia: The Stein Collec-
tion in the British Museum, 3 vols. (Tokyo: Kodansha, 1982–85); and Jacques Giès, ed., Les
arts de l’Asie centrale: la collection Paul Pelliot du musée national des arts asiatiques-
Guimet, 2 vols. (Paris: Réunion des musées nationaux, 1995–96).
36For a general description of the arrangement of donors in these paintings, see Michel
Soymié, “Les donateurs dans les peintures de Dunhuang,” Cahiers d’Extrême-Asie 11
(1999–2000): 1–24.
37Stein painting 19, in Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, pl. 22; Arthur Waley, A Cat-
alogue of Paintings Recovered from Tun-huang by Sir Aurel Stein, K.C.I.C. (London: British
Museum, 1931), 34.

--- Page 18 ---
152 Representations of Merit
Fig. 1.—Photo of Ksitigarbha as Lord of the Six Ways (Stein painting 19,
Stein Collection, British Museum). ç The Trustees of The British Museum.
Used by permission.

--- Page 19 ---
History of Religions 153
beings in the six realms of rebirth (hell-being, hungry ghost, animal,
human, asura [demigod], and deva [god]) in the background.38
At the bottom of the painting there are two male donor figures on the
right, and two women on the left. These are members of the donor’s family,
living and dead, who are represented as sharing in making the gift while,
at the same time, they are recipients of the merit of the gift made on their
behalf. The cartouches read: (1) “the son Xingtong dedicates whole-
heartedly (yixin gong yang )”; (2) “the deceased Dun[huang] (il-
legible) bin “(perhaps the donor’s father)”; (3) “the deceased mother
madame Yin dedicates wholeheartedly”; (4) “the Tenth Daughter ded-
icates wholeheartedly. Married into the Yin family.”39
The central inscription identifies the main donor and his motivations:
The one who caused this to be painted is the disciple of pure faith Kang Qingnu
.40 His body lodges in the Burning House and he fears to fall into the
Five Evil Ways. Fortune and disaster are inconstant; his heart longs to be among
the ranks of the emancipated. Now he is again attacked by sickness and pain and
cannot obtain relief. He desires that his small afflictions should rapidly retreat
from his body and all misery from his constitution. May his merit cause [Ksiti-
garbha’s] staff to shake so that in hell lotus buds grow; and may his radiant
gem shine forth in the Dark Ways, till they be turned into the semblance of the
Pure Land. Also he desires that his parents and relations by marriage and all his
connections may rest in health and security and that his brothers, cousins, and
all the collateral branches of his family may be moistened with the dew of a
prosperous portion. Qianlong 4th year (963), a guihai year, 5th month 22nd day
(June 16).41
This somber plea for salvation and release from pain is well matched
with the painting’s subject, the bodhisattva who rescues loved ones from
hell, surrounded by figures representing the “dark ways” or undesirable
rebirths. The prayer for relief from suffering is thick with Buddhist allu-
sions that link the personal and the universal. Weakness and affliction is
complemented by the image of the power of the sufferer’s merit to activate
the salvific mercy of Ksitigarbha, such that there is a sense of the suppli-
cant’s individual connection with the bodhisattva. The final part of the
prayer expresses a conventional wish for family health and prosperity
38Asuras are beings that are more powerful but also more passionate and violent than
humans, and devas are gods, also subject to eventual death and rebirth. For a study of popu-
lar beliefs about the six paths in medieval Chinese Buddhism, see Stephen Teiser, The Ghost
Festival in Medieval China (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988).
39Translation adapted from Waley, A Catalogue of Paintings Recovered from Tun-huang, 34.
40The “Kang” surname indicates Sogdian origins.
41Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, 318; translation adapted from Waley, A Cata-
logue of Paintings Recovered from Tun-huang, 34.

--- Page 20 ---
154 Representations of Merit
without alluding to a Buddhist context or to merit transfer. The soteriol-
ogy evoked is thus closer to the “sacrificial” than the “karmic” mode; the
purity of the supplicant is stressed over his sins, and he appeals directly
to Ksitigarbha without visual or textual reference to the mediation of the
Sa“gha.
the advent of maitreya
Contrasting with this evocation of illness and the sufferings of samsara,
the next image I will discuss is one of the ideal donor in the ideal world.
Both textually and visually, the prevailing tone of the second example, a
tenth-century image of advent of the future Buddha Maitreya, presents a
“bright” counterpoint to the darkness of the painting of Ksitigarbha and
the six realms (see fig. 2).42 Scenes in the painting illustrate passages from
the Maitreya-sutra,43 focusing on King Sa“ka and his consort ‡yamavati
as ideal devotees and donors.
Inscribed in the painting’s cartouches, passages from the Maitreya-sutra
portray a paradise on earth, where there is no pain and nothing to fear.
Beings are still subject to death, but it is said that “in those days the
people of the land when their span of life is over, will go of their own
accord to the tomb and die there.”44 Although the sutra and the painting
evoke an idyllic time when everyone is freed from suffering and the world
is made beautiful, they also tell us that in the midst of this bounty people
realize that “even if for a thousand million years I escape the Three Evil
Ways, the world is impermanent and life cannot be preserved forever.”45
The painting shows scenes of the future when Maitreya will finally leave
his own Tusita heaven to be born on earth, and myriads of his devotees
will be reborn with him and become monks and nuns. First the king and
then the queen and their son Devarupa will take the tonsure.46 The med-
itating power of the Sa“gha is amply represented in the figures of monks
who attend the central figure of Maitreya, the monk and possibly nun
who accompany Maitreya as he visits an elderly couple in the city, and
the clergy who assist in tonsuring the king, queen, crown prince, and their
retinues.
42Stein painting 11, in Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, pl. 12.
43T. 14 (454) 423–25, trans. Kumarajiva.
44Top right, first cartouche, in Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, 309. See T. 14 (454)
424a.
45Fourth cartouche, four men by central courtyard, in Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2,
310. See T. 14 (454) 424c.
46Cartouche next to the king’s tonsuring, in Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, 311.
See T. 14 (454) 424c. Cartouche next to the tonsuring of the queen and prince, in Whitfield,
Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, 312. See T. 14 (454) 424c.

--- Page 21 ---
History of Religions 155
Fig. 2.—Detail of photo of Paradise of Maitreya (Stein painting 11, Stein
Collection, British Museum). ç The Trustees of The British Museum. Used by
permission.
In the city where Maitreya is born the earth is gold sand, and heaps of
gold and silver lie about.47 This lack of necessity is the ground on which
the offering table is set up and laden with precious vessels, and the king’s
jewelled throne is set forth to be dismantled and given to Maitreya.48 Two
copyist errors provide food for thought regarding donation. At the end of
the scriptural passage about the heaps of gold and silver, the copyist has
added the superfluous phrase “will make offering” (gongyang shi ).
This phrase occurs as a standard code to subsequent passages detailing
the offerings of devas and brahmans, but in the sutra itself the precious
ground is not offered, it is simply the given.49
47Fifth cartouche, four women on opposite side of central courtyard, in Whitfield, Art of
Central Asia, vol. 2, 311. See T. 14 (454) 424a.
48Representing the utopian end of kingship associated with Maitreya, the symbolism
worked both ways, inspiring proscription of Maitreya cults by Emperor Wen of the Sui
(r. 581–604), and embrace of Maitreya worship by Empress Wu Zetian (r. 684–705).
See Jan Nattier, Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in the Buddhist Prophecy of Decline
(Berkeley, CA: Asian Humanities Press, 1991); Antonino Forte, Political Propaganda and
Ideology in China at the End of the 7th Century: Inquiry into the Nature, Authors, and Func-
tion of the Tunhuang Document S. 6502 Followed by an Annotated Translation (Naples: In-
stituto Universitario Orientale, 1976).
49This recalls the motif of A¶oka “giving the earth” in a former life and at his death; see
John Strong, The Legend of King A¶oka: A Study and Translation of the A¶okavadana (Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1983).

--- Page 22 ---
156 Representations of Merit
The second error also occurs in conjunction with an offering, an offer-
ing that does not occur in the sutra but is described in the cartouche next
to the offering table. This inscription tells of Brahmans who will leave
their homes and will “build a stupa (reliquary edifice) and make an offer-
ing of it.”50 In the scripture, Maitreya gives the Brahmans the throne given
to him by the king, and they then dismantle it.51 In the painting, however,
the inscription in the cartouche refers to building a stupa while the visual
representation shows the dismantling of a throne. This scribal disjunction
results in an echo of Mauss’s “total prestation” of both sides of the gift—
the creation of an object of sacred power through the destruction of an
object of secular power, a potlatch in the court of Maitreya.52
the bodhisattva avalokite vara, the nun yanhui,
‡
and her brother zhang youcheng
The last inscribed painting that I will discuss is an image of the bodhisattva
Avalokite¶vara (Guanyin) flanked by portrayals of the deceased siblings
of the unnamed donor, dated 910 (see fig. 3).53 The figures of the siblings
Yanhui and Zhang Youcheng are called portraits and are handled more in-
dividualistically than the majority of standardized donor figures seen in
these paintings. We cannot assume that they look like the deceased, but
it is clear that they were intended to reflect the high quality of painting
associated with portraits. The three inscriptions on the painting itself are
similar in format to dedications on other ninth- and tenth-century paint-
ings in the Dunhuang collection, but this painting is notable for having
two additional inscriptions on paper attached to the back. In considering
these inscriptions, I would like to draw attention to the various ways that
the figures are identified and relationships of offering and “mutual aid” are
established.
1. Upper right green cartouche:
Praise to the great merciful, great compassionate savior from hardship Ava-
lokite¶vara Bodhisattva, in perpetual offering. Offered in the hope that the
50Green cartouche between table and throne, in Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2,
312. See T. 14 (454) 424c.
51Waley, A Catalogue of Paintings recovered from Tun-huang, 18.
52Though the notion of the Northwest Indians’ destructive potlatch inspired much creative
speculation, most notably in the work of Marcel Mauss and Georges Bataille, subsequent an-
thropological reassessments indicate that the destructive potlatch was an anomaly caused by
population decline and breakdown of traditions in the wake of European contact. See Philip
Drucker and Robert F. Heizer, To Make My Name Good: A Reexamination of the Southern
Kwakiutl Potlatch (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967); Margaret Seguin, In-
terpretive Contexts for Traditional and Current Coast Tsimshian Feasts (Ottawa: National
Museums of Canada, 1985); Aldona Jonaitis, ed., Chiefly Feasts: The Enduring Kwakiutl
Potlatch (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1991).
53Stein painting 14, Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, pl. 7.
One Line Long

--- Page 23 ---
History of Religions 157
Fig. 3.—Photo of Avalokite¶vara (Stein painting 14, Stein Collection, British
Museum). ç The Trustees of The British Museum. Used by permission.
empire may be peaceful and that the Wheel of the Law may continually turn
therein. Secondly, on behalf of my elder sister and teacher, on behalf of the
souls of my deceased parents, that they may be born again in the Pure Land,
I reverently [had this image of] the Great Holy One made, and dedicate it
wholeheartedly.54
54The cartouche should be read from left to right; see Whitfield, Art of Central Asia,
vol. 2, 301.

--- Page 24 ---
158 Representations of Merit
The “perpetual offering” of devotion is represented in the words of the
inscription, by the fact of having had the painting made, and by the por-
traits of the two deceased represented in the attitude of offering worship
to Avalokite¶vara. Following a pattern found in a number of other such
paintings, transfer of the merit of this perpetual offering is first dedicated
for the sake of the welfare of the empire, linking this with the practice of
the Dharma, and then turns to personal dedications. The parents and the
elder sister-nun who are to receive the merit are identified not by name
but by their relationship with the donor (who might be either male or
female). They appear to be set apart for special respect, and the nun,
identified as the donor’s teacher, is mentioned before their parents. This
sister-teacher of the donor is portrayed in the painting, but the parents are
not. Also on the painting itself is the following identification by name of
the younger brother portrayed in the painting, who is not mentioned in
the above inscription.
2. Lower right white cartouche:
[On behalf of] my late younger brother the Probationary Chamberlain Zhang
Youcheng , dedicated wholeheartedly.
Also on the face of the painting, above the portrait of the nun, is a large
cartouche of prayers for the deceased, with the dedication date.
3. Left, darker white cartouche:
All things born are unstable as a lightning-flash;
They perish as soon as their karma is exhausted, for they have no permanence.
But the compassionate Avalokite¶vara rescues creatures of every sort;
with love, how painstakingly he builds a bridge [to salvation]!
Giving insubstantial wealth (sheshi foucai ) to make a portrait (zhen-
xiang ),
the beams of his light flash and glint in the splendor of a colored painting.
I only pray that the dead may be born in the Pure Land,
that they escape the pain of the Three Ways and mount to the Heavenly Halls.
Tianfu 10th year, a gengwu year, 15th day of 7th month finished and inscribed.55
Here the fundamental Buddhist theme of salvation from impermanence
is evoked, though the soteriology is inconsistent with classic Buddhist
soteriology, which holds that it is the continual accumulation of karma
that causes death and rebirth, and exhaustion of karma is liberation. How-
ever, the notion that impermanent good karma/good deeds will be ex-
hausted unless transmuted by compassion echoes Huiyuan’s explanation
55Translation adapted from Waley, A Catalogue of Paintings Recovered from Tun-huang, 27.
One Line Long

--- Page 25 ---
History of Religions 159
of merit transfer as a function of the nature of reality. As described pre-
viously, according to the rubric of “merit transfer of reality” the intrinsi-
cally impermanent nature of all dharmas, including good deeds, is “made
secure by accordance with the absolute” through the practice of giving
away merit for the sake of others. In this prayer the donor alludes to his
or her offering of the painting on behalf of the dead. At the same time,
the donor appeals to Avalokite¶vara’s compassion, which is extended to
“all sorts” of beings, implying that even those who may not be worthy
according to the universal laws of cause and effect may still hope for re-
birth in the Pure Land through faith in the bodhisattva.56
Moreover, in the line “the beams of his light flash and glint in the
splendor of a colored painting,” we see a reflection of the notion that
images have individualized numinous powers.57 This was a repeated
theme in both Indian and Chinese Buddhist popular stories, and its Chi-
nese manifestations were also influenced by indigenous metaphysical
notions of the relationship between natural sympathetic resonances (gan-
ying ) and supramundane powers (gantong ). The eighth century
also saw the beginnings of a sophisticated discourse playing on the idea
of the virtual nature of all things, body and image alike. References to
the mutually resonating qualities of physical bodies, natural phenomena,
salvific manifestations, and artistic representations were developed in the
discourses of Chan Buddhism, literati poetry, and art appreciation. By the
Song, we see playful and witty references to the notion that representa-
tion was the “true form” of emptiness, because it directly embodied vir-
tuality, other-dependence, and illusory self-referentiality drawing attention
56Avalokite¶vara is known as the attendant and mediator for the Buddha Amitabha, who
presides over the Western Pure Land. According to popular beliefs based on the Pure Land
scriptures (T. 12 [360], [365], and [366]), while still a bodhisattva Amitabha vowed to dedi-
cate his merit in order to create a special realm wherein beings could be reborn with ideal
conditions for practice of Dharma and swift liberation. See Luis O. Gómez, The Land of
Bliss: The Paradise of the Buddha of Measureless Light: Sanskrit and Chinese Versions of
the Sukhavativyuha Sutras (Honolulu and Kyoto: University of Hawai’i Press and Higashi
Honganji Shinshu Otani-ha, 1996); and Fujita Kotatsu, “The Textual Origins of the Kuan
Wu-liang-shou ching: A Canonical Scripture of Pure Land Buddhism,” in Chinese Buddhist
Apocrypha, ed. Robert E. Buswell Jr. (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 1990), 149–73.
57There are many stories of images with powers in Chinese lore, and I will cite two that
are readily at hand. The first is a story from the Song gaoseng zhuan (Song biog-
raphies of eminent monks) of an image with powers derived from the physical substance of
its subject; it was said that a clay image of the Chan master Wuxiang that had been
mixed with his ashes was responsible for performing a miracle; Song gaoseng zhuan, T. 50
(2061) 832c24–833a3. Another story in the Taiping yulan shows that the devotion or
qualities of the maker of an image could also give it numinous power. It was said that Yong-
jing temple in Chang’an had a stone image five chi (Chinese feet) tall that was made by
the fourth daughter of King A¶oka; the image was crudely made but had great numinous
efficacy. Taiping yulan, fascicle 657, cited in Zengding Tang liangjing chengfang kao
, ed. Li Jianchao (rev. and expanded Study of the City Streets of the
Two Capitals of the Tang), originally compiled by Xu Song (Xian: San Qin , 1996), 72.

--- Page 26 ---
160 Representations of Merit
to its illusory nature.58 Although the Dunhuang painting inscription does
not partake in this style of discourse, it does evoke analogy and contrast
between the “lightning flash” instability of the physical body and the
beams of the transcendent that are made present in the painting by the
power of the bodhisattva’s salvific merit.
Turning the painting over, we find two inscriptions on the back:
4. Identification on paper attached to back:
Identical with number 2.59
5. Inscription on paper attached to back:
Praise to the figure of the Bodhisattva Avalokite¶vara,60 respectfully offered
on behalf of the deceased nun who was Dharma-Vinaya Ordination Admitter
(Falu lintan ) of Paguang monastery, the Worthy Yanhui ,
and on behalf of the Probationary Chamberlain Zhang Youcheng. These two
portraits (maozhen ) are dedicated wholeheartedly, with the following gatha-
appreciation (hezan ):
Great indeed is the Law-King, his manifestations boundless;
he roams through the Six Ways, and wherever suffering is, he is there first.
When he is evoked he arrives at once, rescue is assured;
he takes on the sufferings of beings who dwell in Jambudvipa.
Mysterious, hard to discern, yet always at one’s side;
according to the minds of beings, he has transformations innumerable.
The delusions of those who worship him are extinguished; the lives of those
who make obeisance to him are lengthened.
May departed loved ones not experience the slough and scalding [cauldron];
may they be the beneficiaries of the Bodhisattva’s vow, and in his shadow enter
the Western [Paradise],
and may living loved ones’ days be prolonged for endless eons.
Color painting, of the figure of the Great Holy One and the portrait of the nun
Dharma-Vinaya [Ordination Admitter], [on such a day] finished and inscribed.61
58For a discussion of these developments, see Wendi L. Adamek, The Mystique of Trans-
mission (New York: Columbia University Press, forthcoming), chap. 7.
59Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, pl. 8.
60Namu Guanshiyin pusa yiqu . Qu is body, form, and is the standard
word used to itemize images. For an example of a merit record of images, see the lists of
groups of images in the Dunhuang ms. Pelliot 2641; the eulogy at the end praises the images
as having the thirty-two major marks in brilliant array and the eighty minor marks of “com-
pletely perfect bodies” (zhoubian shenqu ). In Zheng Binglin , Dunhuang
beimingzan jishi (An annotated compilation of Dunhuang memorial in-
scription eulogies) (Lanzhou: Gansu jiaoyu, 1992), 521–22.
61Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, pl. 8. Translation adapted from Waley, A Catalogue
of Paintings Recovered from Tun-huang, 28–29. The fifth inscription, with its preface iden-
tifying the subject followed by a gatha appreciation (hezan), is very similar in format to a
One Line Long

--- Page 27 ---
History of Religions 161
In these eulogies and identifications on the front and back of the paint-
ing, the interplay of redundancies and omissions create the impression of
overlapping symbolic hierarchies. The donor’s brother and even her or
his parents appear to be farther down the chain of reverence than her or
his sister, but the brother’s name and rank appear three times, while the
nun’s name and title are given only in the preface to the eulogy on the
back. In the painting itself, however, the image of the nun is larger than
that of her brother, and almost as large as that of the bodhisattva.
Hierarchy was essential to the maintenance of the system of reciprocal
benefit between clergy and lay believers. The clergy, on a level above
the lay devotee but below the bodhisattvas, functioned as a “merit field”
because they collectively represented the aspiration to liberation and ul-
timate truth, the matrix within which “merit seeds,” on the level of cause
and effect or conventional truth, were actualized. At the same time, the
mediating role of monks and nuns was a function of proximity, to human
suffering on the one hand and to the bodhisattva’s merit on the other. The
bodhisattvas were likewise mediators between the human realm and the
Pure Lands of the Buddhas.
In the painting, the proximity of the three figures gives the impression
that the deceased have immediate access to the bodhisattva, which in turn
serves to bring the viewer closer to Avalokite¶vara. As noted, the figures
of the nun Yanhui and her younger brother are carefully rendered, and
rather than kneeling at the foot of the painting they stand upright. Seen in
three-quarters view, the deceased flank the front-facing main image, in
the manner of personal attendants. In other paintings, this is a treatment
usually reserved for ideal bodhisattvas, devas, guardian deities, and monks,
while the donors and deceased are usually portrayed kneeling or standing
in a lower register. However, there are other Dunhuang paintings that
portray identified monk or nun donors in the same register or on the same
scale as the central image.62
portrait eulogy, zhenzan , of which there are numerous examples in the Dunhuang
cache. See Rao Zongyi , ed. in chief, Dunhuang miaozhenzan jiaolu bing yanjiu
(Critical edition and study of Dunhuang portrait eulogies) (Taibei:
Xinwenfeng, 1994); and Zheng Binglin, Dunhuang beimingzan jishi. We will examine a
Chan zhenzan in the next section.
62For other examples of conspicuous depictions of donors, see the following Dunhuang
paintings in the Pelliot collection of the Musée Guimet: (1) MG. 17665 in Giès, ed., Les arts
de l’Asie centrale, vol. 1, pl. 72. In this tenth-century image of Avalokite¶vara, the nun Xin-
qing is the daughter of the donor, and both kneel at the feet of the main image. (2) MG.
17778, in ibid., vol. 1, pl. 92. Kneeling in the lower register of this early tenth-century paint-
ing of Eleven-faced Avalokite¶vara, the donor, the administrator Cheng Enxin , faces
his deceased older sister, the nun Miaoda . Her image is also identified as a maozhen, a
portrait. (3) MG. 25486, in ibid., vol. 1, pl. 93. In this painting of Twelve-faced Avalokite¶-
vara dated 959, only the monk Fayuan (the uncle of the donor) kneels at the feet of the
image, while the other deceased and living family members, including the principal donor
Zhang Baozhi , are in the separate register at the bottom. Interestingly, there is no

--- Page 28 ---
162 Representations of Merit
The colophon recording the completion of the painting reinforces the
sense of connection between the transcendent and the human merit fields
and mediators, for it identifies the image of the painting as the figure of
the bodhisattva Avalokite¶vara along with a portrait of the nun Yanhui.63
In the soteriology of skillful means, the image of the bodhisattva is as
real (and as illusory) a site of salvific manifestation as any other form, as
evoked in the verse above: “mysterious, hard to discern, yet always at one’s
side; according to the minds of beings, he has transformations innumer-
able.” Through the pairing of Avalokite¶vara and Yanhui in the colophon
and the idealized attitude of Yanhui’s image, she appears to take on a
pivotal role as both supplicant and mediator. The donor refers to Yanhui
as her or his teacher, and she is identified as a ranking member of the
clergy. The prayers dedicate the merit of the donation for the sake of
deceased family members’ entry into the Pure Land in Avalokite¶vara’s
“shadow,” but the manner of pictorial representation could suggest that
the donor also hopes for Yanhui’s continued aid and intervention on
behalf of “living loved ones” once she is successfully reborn in the Pure
Land. Furthermore, the image of the younger brother is reminiscent of
images of the “boys of good and evil” who flank Avalokite¶vara or the
Kings of Hell in other paintings.64 Given these echoes, I would argue that
this painting might reflect something of the older, pre-Buddhist belief in
deceased ancestors as mediators for living family, translated into Buddhist
iconographic and inscriptional idioms.
image to go with the cartouche opposite Fayuan, which marks the dedication of the daughter
of Zhang (Bao)zhi. Jean-Pierre Drège speculates that this cartouche should correspond to the
image of the little girl beside Zhang’s wife and notes that this elevation of the cartouche
without an image is curious; see ibid., vol. 1, notes to pl. 93. I am wondering if this might
mean that the family had decided that she would become a nun in the future.
63There is also overlapping and redundancy at work in the identifications of the type of
image to which the figures belong. On the front, the painting of Avalokite¶vara is referred to
as a zhenxiang , while in this inscription on the back his figure (qu ) is grouped with
the maozhen of the nun and her brother. Jiang Boqin demonstrates that both
zhenxiang and maozhen were used for portraits and Buddhist images, though here there
appears to be a distinction. See his Dunhuang yishu zongjiao yu liyue wenming
(Dunhuang arts, religion, and “rites and music” civilization) (Beijing:
Zhongguo shehui kexue, 1996), 84–85. As noted above, the inscription on MG. 17778 also
identifies the image of a deceased nun (dedicated by her brother) as a maozhen; see Giès, ed.,
Les arts de l’Asie centrale, vol. 1, pl. 92. See also Soymié, “Les Donateurs dans les Peintures
de Dunhuang,” 13 and 19.
64Shan’e tongzi ; these boys or twins of Daoist origin attend all persons through-
out life, recording good and bad deeds that will determine one’s future incarnations. I do not
know of other research suggesting that donors may have had themselves or loved ones por-
trayed as one of these attendants, but this may be a topic worthy of further exploration.
Regarding the background and iconography of these figures, see Giès, ed., Les arts de l’Asie
centrale, vol. 1, pl. 52; see also Stephen F. Teiser, The Scripture on the Ten Kings and the
Making of Purgatory in Medieval Chinese Buddhism (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press,
1994), 184–93, 203.

--- Page 29 ---
History of Religions 163
economies of merit
I would like to draw some attention to the economic ramifications of the
notion of monks and nuns as mediators for their families. Regarding the
painting of Avalokite¶vara, the nun Yanhui, and her brother Zhang You-
cheng, Roderick Whitfield suggests that the lavish inscriptions and the
portrait style, which would have been considerably more expensive than
generic donor images, may have been due to the ostentatious Buddhist
giving discernible in other artifacts of this period, corresponding to the
period of ascendancy of the Cao family.65 We could thus take the ref-
erence to “giving insubstantial wealth” (sheshi foucai ) as a
means to draw attention to the expenditure while at the same time gain-
ing merit for nonattachment.66 However, this phrase also usefully points
to concrete economic distinctions between landed and liquid wealth.
Jacques Gernet, in his magisterial Buddhism in Chinese Society: An
Economic History from the Fifth to the Tenth Centuries, explicates and
often excoriates the connection between Buddhist monasteries and the
volatile loan markets and money-making enterprises that expanded in
the ninth and tenth centuries to the detriment of the hereditary manorial
economy.67 Dunhuang, independently administered by prominent local
clans who came into power upon the expulsion of the Tibetans in 860
and maintained their position until the Xi Xia takeover in 1036, reflects
this trend. Indeed, the social and economic documents found in Dunhuang
provide some of the most concrete remaining evidence of a medieval mer-
cantile middle class, and surviving examples of its portable and mass-
produced art also attest to the growing economic power of this sector.
Drawing on the insights of Pierre Bourdieu’s The Logic of Practice, I
would like to briefly examine this economic trend in terms of the work-
ings of “symbolic capital.” Symbolic capital refers to the accumulation
of wealth, authority, and goodwill that enables its possessors to mediate
the misrecognition or masking of exploitative or asymmetrical economic
relationships in traditional societies.68 This collective misrecognition
converts starkly economic relationships into social interdependencies in
a world where “scarcity of time is so rare and scarcity of goods so great.”69
When we look at Dunhuang art, manuscripts, and social documents,
we could say that “everything happens as if” symbolic capital was also
65Whitfield, Art of Central Asia, vol. 2, 301.
66Here one could draw analogies with Derrida’s discussion of the “counterfeit coin,” but
I do not want to further tax the reader’s goodwill with an excursus within an excursus and
therefore refer those interested to the second part of Given Time: I. Counterfeit Money.
67Regarding Gernet’s work, Buddhism in Chinese Society, see n. 10 above.
68Pierre Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice, trans. Richard Nice (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1990), 112–21.
69Ibid., 17.

--- Page 30 ---
164 Representations of Merit
being transformed by processes of rationalization, capitalization, and spe-
cialization, reflecting the social and economic pressures attendant on ex-
pansion of trade and financial markets. And it is through the notion of merit
that we can see these processes working. Merit would seem to be sym-
bolic capital par excellence, and while it does perform the local social
sublimating function of symbolic capital, it also evokes the power of im-
personal universal law, Dharma. Consider, for example, the rationale pro-
vided by Huiyuan in the Dasheng yi zhang discussed above. He explains
that through merit transfer (i.e., continual reinvestment of merit), one is
able to turn good deeds into permanent assets that increase limitlessly
and “transcend the triple-world.” Through circulating rather than stock-
piling the merit they gain, beings are able to make their spiritual good/s
secure through “accordance with the absolute.”70 By implication, this
economy dwarfs the aims of traditional symbolic capital—mere worldly
prestige, family honor, and prosperity.
In the traditional manorial system, family interests were bound to the
costly and time-consuming “circuit of giving” necessary to the mainte-
nance of symbolic capital. Rituals of reciprocity between host and client
naturalized their asymmetry, converting the raw power differential into a
mutually (though not equally) beneficial relationship that, like land and
debts, could extend through generations. Gernet shows that from the fifth
century onward the growing Buddhist economy copied the traditional land-
bound economy in many ways, but it was also porous to the more liquid
mercantile economy. Monks and nuns could function as mediators in many
ways, for while they were symbolically independent and to varying de-
grees economically independent of traditional family ties, they also, as
Hao Chunwen shows, continued to be part of their natal families and net-
works.71 In their dual function as members of a family and members of
an entity independent of family, the clergy were ideal agents for the pro-
cesses of capitalization.
Thus it is no anomaly that the clergy were so instrumental in developing
protocapitalist sectors of the medieval Chinese economy, so that temples
functioned as early banking institutions. They offered loans at interest,
maintained a storehouse of liquid assets (donated objects of silk and metal,
pawned items, and cash), and held goods and cash on deposit for traveling
merchants. The clergy were also actively engaged in industry, commerce,
services, and the arts. Those who had “left home” were able to mediate
70See above, Dasheng yi zhang, T. 44 (1851) 637a–b.
71Hao Chunwen , Tang houqi Wudai Songchu Dunhuang sengni de shehui sheng-
huo (The social life of Buddhist monks and nuns in
Dunhuang during the Late Tang, Five Dynasties and Early Song) (Beijing: Zhongguo shehui
kexue, 1998).

--- Page 31 ---
History of Religions 165
between the traditional clan system and the economic forms that threatened
that system. The Sa“gha was a medium of transfer between two systems
of wealth production, and the notion of merit and merit transfer is an
ideal representation of this conduit function. The circulation of portable
wealth through the more mobile and liquid aspects of the Buddhist
economy was also backed by the traditional “gold standard” of land, im-
perial honors, and metal wealth bound up in the large monasteries. These
monasteries in turn became centers for other forms of social fluidity and
professional specialization—printing, the arts, public education and wel-
fare, and alternative employment for those unwilling or unable to enter
into civil service.
A darker side of economic fluidity may also be reflected in the Dun-
huang prayers for relief from disease, such as we saw in the donor’s lament
in the painting of Ksitigarbha. Although treatment of illness is clearly a
major focus of religious practice in most premodern societies, we could
speculate that the networks of travel and cultural exchange sustained by
merchants and monks may have facilitated the spread of infectious dis-
eases from one region to another. Again at a nexus between traditional
categories and the new interstices, the monasteries served as both inns
and hospitals, offering care for the afflicted that was not dependent on
family connections. Michel Strickmann gives us a glimpse of the vivid
array of treatments for disease contained in Buddhist and Daoist mantic
scriptures and manuals produced in China between the fifth and twelfth
centuries.72
Visual and textual representations of heavens and Pure Lands were the
crowning glory of Buddhism’s symbolic capital. “The potlatch in Mai-
treya’s court” reflects the utopian vision of the benefits of the traditional
economy, which depended on strict hierarchies, impossibly transformed
into wealth for all alike. Images of tonsuring are symbolic of transfer into
this utopia. However, at the other extreme lay the Buddhist hells, also
vividly evoked in Dunhuang manuscripts and paintings. The balance-sheet
approach to moral accountability, reflected in the “boys of good and evil”
who keep track of one’s deeds, can be traced through centuries of mutual
influence between Buddhist and Daoist notions of the afterlife. We may
also see this obsession with moral accounts as a response to the frighten-
ing aspects of a market economy, in which the circulation of goods ex-
tended beyond the control of the local clans and defaulters and charlatans
might hope to escape the gaze of local and imperial authority. Popular
Buddhist works such as the Scripture on the Ten Kings could assure
devotees that lack of accountability on earth would be taken care of in
72Michel Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 2002).

--- Page 32 ---
166 Representations of Merit
Yama’s court, yet they could also pledge that aid would be extended to
those who ended up in hell.73
In Huiyuan’s treatise, bodhisattvas as a class function as mediators for
the universal cause-and-effect laws of the transmutation of good and goods
into merit, while in the Dunhuang paintings paradigmatic bodhisattvas
function as personal saviors of the faithful. Ksitigarbha could deliver
even the unworthy from hell, Maitreya could welcome devotees into his
own heaven to await induction into the ideal Sa“gha of the future, and
Avalokite¶vara could aid those praying to be reborn into the Pure Land,
where ultimate liberation is swiftly achieved. The mediating function of
monks and nuns was also due to both collective and personal identities.
Collectively the Sa“gha represented guidance and intercession for the
laity, and individual monks and nuns served as links connecting various
kinds of spiritual, economic, social, and family relationships.
The status of nuns is particularly expressive of the pivotal functioning
of clerics, mediating between universal and personal salvation and be-
tween clerical and household spheres. Unlike daughters and sisters who
left home to be absorbed into their husband’s household economy, nuns
could remain part of their natal family’s system of interests and at the same
time provide access to the beneficial networks of the Sa“gha. Normative
notions of Sa“gha authority centered on male lineages of master and dis-
ciples, and, while nuns were not privileged in this alternative kinship
structure, their identities were also not as thoroughly transmuted by it.
From the evidence provided by Dunhuang paintings and documents, and
also by memorial inscriptions from other areas of China, we are able to
discern that nuns’ relationships with their natal families often formed an
important part of their Sa“gha identities.74
In the system of circulation of symbolic capital, living and deceased
nuns had a unique status. They were owed nothing by the family, and yet,
unlike unmarried daughters, they were a credit to the family. Through the
Sa“gha a nun could even be a creditor to the family, but she was safely
“outside” (chujia ) even if she still lived in the family compound and
ate family grain—which counted as a gift to the Sa“gha and earned
merit. By virtue of being outside the family, she was not someone who
could lay competing claims to autonomous deployment of clan resources.
By virtue of being in the family, she was someone who could deploy the
merit of belonging to the clergy for the benefit of the family. Therefore,
she was in a unique position as a childless daughter, sister, and aunt
73See Stephen F. Teiser, The Scripture on the Ten Kings and the Making of Purgatory in
Medieval Chinese Buddhism.
74This observation is based on Hao Chunwen’s Tang houqi Wudai Songchu Dunhuang
sengni de shehui shenghuo cited above and also on my current research on memorial inscrip-
tions for Buddhist nuns.

--- Page 33 ---
History of Religions 167
whose accomplishments and services could be acknowledged and even
celebrated. Furthermore, as I suggested in connection with the portrait of
Yanhui, a deceased nun or monk could be seen as an otherworldly mediator
for living and dead family members.
According to Bourdieu, cultural practice and symbolic structure are not
in a simple relationship of avowed significance over and against uncon-
scious motivation, and it is not that the relations of practice and symbolic
structure must then be unmasked and interpreted by the theorist to reveal
their true nature as facilitating rational economic and social interests. In
Bourdieu’s analysis, “misrecognition” points precisely to the agents’
recognition of the necessity for conscious manipulation on dual or mul-
tiple levels. In medieval Chinese negotiation of these levels, the Buddhist
notion of merit, and the function of the Sa“gha as agents of merit, were
valuable additions to the repertoire of representations through which
necessary misrecognition functioned. Buddhist practices contributed to
socially destabilizing economic activities, but they also offered new
spheres of cultural and social activity. I suggest that among other func-
tions explored in this article, the notion of merit offered a symbolic rec-
onciliation between systems in tension between the manorial and market
economies. Merit represented the utopia of unlimited wealth, honor, and
status within a system that was designed to protect these resources from
overuse and depletion. Merit transfer afforded the possibility of satisfac-
tion of social and familial debts and spiritual capitalization—not just the
“keeping-while-giving” of traditional exchange, but also unlimited return
on investments.75
“no-merit” and portrait dharma
In a well-known scene in the annals of Chan/Zen, the legendary first
patriarch of Chinese Chan, Bodhidharma , meets Emperor Wu
of the Liang (r. 502–49) and brusquely dismisses his meritorious
activities. The episode was probably created by the “Southern School”
advocate Shenhui (684–758), but it enjoyed many subsequent retell-
ings.76 The following version is taken from the Lidai fabao ji
75Annette Weiner analyzes Pacific systems of exchange that revolved around various forms
of “inalienable” possessions, a system that she calls “keeping-while-giving.” See Inalienable
Possessions: The Paradox of Keeping-While-Giving (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1992).
76The encounter is found in Shenhui’s Putidamou nanzong ding shifei lun
(Treatise determining the true and false about the Southern School of Bodhi-
dharma); in Hu Shi , Xinjiaoding de Dunhuangxieben Shenhui heshang yizhu liang-
zhong (A new collation of two Dunhuang manuscripts
authored by the Venerable Shenhui) (Taibei: Hu Shi jinian guan, 1970), 261–62. See also
Yanagida Seizan , “Goroku no rekishi” (A history of the “Recorded
Sayings” genre), Toho gakuho 57 (1985): 379–81.

--- Page 34 ---
168 Representations of Merit
(Record of the Dharma-Jewel through the ages), a late eighth-century
work that was roughly contemporaneous with the Platform Sutra and was
associated with the antinomian tendency of Chan.77 It is said that the
Indian prince-turned-monk Bodhidharma had just disembarked in China
when he was met by the emperor: “Emperor Wu of the Liang came out of
the city to welcome him personally. He had [Bodhidharma] ascend to the
audience hall and asked him, ‘What teachings to convert beings has the
Venerable brought from the other country?’ The Great Master [Bodhi]-
dharma replied, ‘I have not brought a single word.’ The emperor asked,
‘What merit have We gained in building monasteries and saving people,
copying scriptures and casting statues?’ The Great Master responded, ‘No
merit whatsoever. This is contrived goodness, not true merit.’”78
Disciplies of Chan Master Wuzhu (714–774) of the Bao Tang
(Protect the Tang Dynasty) school that produced the Lidai fabao ji took
the words “no merit” quite literally, perhaps more literally than their origi-
nal proponent Shenhui had intended, and gave up conventional Buddhist
works.79 Above, in Huiyuan’s glorification of merit in the Dasheng yi
zhang, the self-perpetuating and permanent merit field is sustained by the
limitless multiplications of even the smallest act of merit transfer of a
good deed, and this is precisely the conventional soteriology that the Bao
Tang rejected. However, the eighth-century Chan experiment with “no
merit” did not supersede the sixth-century merit field. As traces of the
Bao Tang faded, the exegete Zongmi (780–841) argued that they had
misinterpreted the doctrine of sudden awakening. Zongmi upheld the
view that true practice is possible only after realization of Buddha nature,
and thus he was, doctrinally speaking, on the same ground as Huiyuan, the
merit field wherein all practices and paths are the subordinate function of
ultimate wisdom.80
During the Bao Tang’s brief antinomian moment, however, how did
they apply the doctrine of “no-merit”? Elsewhere I have considered the
77Lidai fabao ji texts and fragments were preserved only among the Dunhuang materials;
the complete or nearly complete texts are P. 2125, S. 516, P. 3717, and Jinyi 304. (P. = Dun-
huang manuscripts in the Pelliot collection of the Bibliothèque Nationale, S. = Dunhuang
manuscripts in the Stein collection of the British Library, Jinyi = Dunhuang ms. in the
collection of the Tianjin Museum of Art.) My translation is from S. 516, with reference to
Yanagida Seizan’s annotated redaction of P. 2125 in Shoki no zenshi II: Rekidai hoboki
(Early Chan history II: Lidai fabao ji) (Tokyo: Chikuma shobo,
1976). I cite the page and line numbers in the Taisho edition because it is the most readily
available, but its Lidai fabao ji is not the best redaction.
78Lidai fabao ji, T. 51 (2075) 180c19–23.
79Wuzhu and his disciples were later designated the “Bao Tang” lineage, derived from the
name of the temple they occupied, the Dali Bao Tang si in Chengdu , Jiannan
(modern-day Sichuan). The Lidai fabao ji was probably composed sometime between
774 and 780 at the Bao Tang monastery by an anonymous disciple or disciples of Wuzhu.
80See the discussion of Zongmi’s map of the path in Peter Gregory, Tsung-mi and the
Sinification of Buddhism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), 173–223.
One Line Long

--- Page 35 ---
History of Religions 169
background of Bao Tang practices at length, but here I will focus on the
portrait-eulogy, zhenzan , commemorating the portrait of the deceased
Chan Master Wuzhu.81 This eulogy is included at the end of the Lidai
fabao ji, which is the sole remaining relic of the Bao Tang; the fate of the
portrait is unknown.
The author of the Lidai fabao ji portrait-eulogy expresses his devotion
to Wuzhu by praising the life breath infused into the portrait by the artist’s
skill and the subject’s intrinsic virtue:
Accordingly we summoned the fine artist, secretly he made the painting. [The
artist] brandished his brush and produced the characteristics, and gazing at the
majestic response-body (yingshen ) separate from characteristics and emptied
of words, we see the expansive vessel of the Dharma. His attainments are like
Heaven’s gifts, his bones (i.e., intrinsic qualities) are not like those of this world.
How silently mysterious and fine! [The portrait] seems to be truly breathing,
the face quivers and wants to speak, the eyes dance and are about to see. “I
look up and it is ever loftier, I venerate and it is ever more dear.”82
Wuzhu’s portrait is called a response body, a salvific manifestation and
a “vessel of the Dharma.” A few lines before the passage quoted, the
eulogist also claims: “Those who gaze at the portrait are able to destroy
evil, those who rely on the Dharma are able to attain the mystery.”83
Wuzhu’s portrait is thus evoked as having the qualities of an image of a
Buddha of bodhisattva, the image itself becoming a focus of devotion
and a site of aid. We recall that the eulogy portion of the inscription on
the image of Avalokite¶vara, above, also praised the bodhisattva’s salvific
transformations, conceptually analogous to the notion of yingshen: “Mys-
terious, hard to discern, yet always at one’s side; according to the minds
of beings, he has transformations innumerable. The delusions of those
who worship him are extinguished, the lives of those who make obei-
sance to him are lengthened.” In the Lidai fabao ji eulogy, this power of
salvific manifestation is attributed to both Chan Master Wuzhu and his
portrait.
Buddhism has a long history of relic veneration, and stupas that were
said to enshrine the relics of the Buddha, his disciples, and subsequent
exemplary monks were important sites of devotional offerings made by
both clergy and laity. In China, the relics of eminent monks were some-
times fashioned into images such as lacquered mummies and clay statues
mixed with the ashes of the deceased, and tales of wonder-working were
81See my study and translation of the Lidai fabao ji (entitled The Mystique of Transmission).
82Lidai fabao ji, T. 51 (2075) 196a22–26. The last phrase is an adaptation of Yan Hui’s
praise of virtue in Lunyu 9.10; see Arthur Waley, trans., The Analects of Confucius
(London: George Allen & Unwin, 1938), 140.
83Lidai fabao ji, T. 51 (2075) 196a11–12.

--- Page 36 ---
170 Representations of Merit
frequently associated with such images. However, the notion that the
painted image of a recently deceased Buddhist monk was a kind of re-
sponsive manifestation of the Dharma appears to have been uncommon.84
Wuzhu, moreover, does not simply represent the power of ordinary
Buddha-Dharma. It is the distinctive Chan Dharma of sudden awakening
that is evoked in the eulogy: “Just so did our Venerable ground his teach-
ings and transmit his Dharma. He displayed the meaning of no-thought,
not moving and not still. He expounded the teaching of sudden awakening,
no-recollection and no-thought. He often told his disciples, ‘The Dharma
is just this, not something verbal explanation can reach. Our Ancestral
Master Dharmatrata (Bodhidharma) transmitted these essentials of the
Dharma, passed from legitimate heir to legitimate heir. It is the secret
teaching of the Buddhas, it is the Prajñaparamita.’”85
Sudden awakening (dunwu ) and no-thought (wunian ) were
by then established as the hallmarks of Southern School Chan, and for
sheer number of repetitions of the term “no-thought” in a single text, the
Lidai fabao ji surely has no equal. Bernard Faure has cast a searching
light on the vivid array of ritual and representational innovations, appro-
priations, and contradictions generated by Chan subitist rhetoric.86 We
may see a manifestation of the paradoxical effects of this “rhetoric of im-
mediacy” at work in the Bao Tang evocation of their teacher’s portrait.
On the one hand, Wuzhu’s disciples commemorated him in a conventional
manner—they commissioned an image and wrote an inscription express-
ing devotion to the teacher and his image. At the same time, they identify
the focus of that devotion as the doctrine of no-thought, the subitist
teaching that both cultivation and culmination of the Buddhist path were
fulfilled in the nonconceptual realization of Buddha nature, without de-
pendence on the mediation of Buddhas, bodhisattvas, clergy, or rituals.
In Song dynasty Chan, the play of identity and difference among rep-
resentation, ritual, and nondual Buddha nature would become a sophis-
ticated game in the Chan paradoxical repertoire, but here devotion to the
image is not ironical and the paradox is not intentional.
Let us consider the pairing of the teaching of no-thought with “no-
recollection,” wuyi . This is one of the “three phrases” Wuzhu claims
to have inherited from his putative master, the Korean monk Wuxiang
(684–762). Wuxiang and Wuzhu are portrayed as being connected
in thought, and in the following passage Wuzhu receives his first trans-
84This claim is based on initial examination of Dunhuang zhenzan (see Rao Zongyi, ed.,
Dunhuang maiozhenzan jiaolu bing yanjiu), but I hope to make a more comprehensive study
of portraits and portrait eulogies as part of my research on donor practices.
85Lidai fabao ji, T. 51 (2075) 195c27–196a5.
86See particularly Bernard Faure, The Rhetoric of Immediacy: A Cultural Critique of Chan/
Zen Buddhism (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991).

--- Page 37 ---
History of Religions 171
mission of Wuxiang’s essential teaching in the form of “three phrases,”
without having ever been in his presence. Wuxiang and Wuzhu are iden-
tified as sharing a mysterious resemblance, like “transformation bodies”
(huashen ), and it is their mutual resonance as related salvific mani-
festations that enables this long-distance, instantaneous transmission:
It happened that there was a merchant [named] Cao Gui who came to pay his
respects [to Wuzhu] and asked, “Has the Venerable ever been to Jiannan? Do
you know the Venerable Kim?” [Wuzhu] answered, “I don’t know him.” Gui
said, “Your features are exactly like those of the Venerable Kim. You [both]
have a mole above the bridge of your nose, and the shape of your face so re-
sembles that of the Venerable in our locale that one could even say there is no
difference. It must be a transformation-body (huashen).”
The Venerable asked Cao Gui, “So the layman has come from Jiannan. [Tell
me], what doctrine does that Venerable preach? Cao Gui replied, “No-recollection,
no-thought, and do not be deluded (wuyi wunian mowang . . .).”87
When the Venerable heard this teaching he understood clearly, and from afar he
met the Venerable Kim face-to-face.88
Here we see the “three phrases” that are partially repeated in the allu-
sion to Wuzhu’s teachings as “no-recollection and no-thought” found in
the portrait eulogy discussed above.89 The Lidai fabao ji authors claim
that Wuxiang taught “no-recollection is the precepts, no-thought is med-
itation, and ‘do not be deluded’ is wisdom.”90 The phrase “No-recollection
is the precepts” illustrates the antinomian “formless practice” for which
the Bao Tang disciples were infamous. Particularly, they were criticized
for not maintaining a well-cultivated merit field fertilized by observation
of the precepts, daily prayers, dedications, and scriptural recitations. They
chose to disassociate themselves from the cycle of offerings, and it is
said that they sometimes went hungry and cold as a result. The Bao Tang
radical reduction of all Buddhist practice to wunian and wuyi did not sur-
vive, and Wuxiang’s other followers were more famous for promulgating
87The last character is the focus of a controversy, and a possible copyist’s error in one
of the mss. does not help matters. S. 516 has , “to forget,” while P. 2125 has , “false” or
“deluded.” In the next section of the Lidai fabao ji, Wuzhu makes a vehement claim that
Wuxiang meant , “deluded” and not , “to forget” (189a14–21), so use of in S. 516
points either to an editing error or is meant to show that Cao Gui misunderstood.
88Lidai fabao ji, T. 51 (2075) 186b8–17.
89The phrase that is omitted in the eulogy, mowang (not being deluded) is disputed,
as noted above. The Chan scholar Zongmi considered the use of to be Wuzhu’s
mistaken understanding of Wuxiang’s own usage mowang (do not forget); see Yuanjue
jing dashu chao (Subcommentary to the scripture of perfect enlightenment),
ZZ. vol. 14; 278d. ZZ. = Nakano Tatsue , ed., Dai Nippon zokuzokyo ,
150 vols. (Kyoto: Zokyo shoin, 1905–12).
90Lidai fabao ji, T. 51 (2075) 185a14.

--- Page 38 ---
172 Representations of Merit
his special style of vocalizing nianfo (recitation of the Buddha’s
name), also mentioned in the Lidai fabao ji.
Indeed, the tension and complementarity between wunian and nianfo
is at the crux of the question of Wuzhu’s Dharma as embodied in his por-
trait. Wunian is usually translated as no-thought, while nianfo also points
to a related meditative aspect of nian and is often translated “Buddha
recollection.” This is one of the most basic types of meditation, buddha-
anusmrti, the practice of recalling in detail (yinian ) the merit and
marks (xiang ) of the Buddha. While in Japan wunian and nianfo would
become hallmarks of a sectarian division between Zen and Pure Land
practice, in China and Korea many masters advocated both, and Wuxiang
(a Korean) was apparently one of the early proponents of this trend.
However, though Wuzhu and the Bao Tang placed exclusive stress on the
wunian aspect and did not overtly advocate nianfo, in effect Wuzhu’s
portrait eulogy exhorts the viewer to nianshi or shiyi , that is, to
recollect the merit and marks of the master.91
This apotheosis should not be understood in the later tantric sense of
guru veneration, but rather with reference to the related concepts of hua-
shen, transformation body, and yingshen, response-body. In the context
of Chinese Buddhist discourse on the trikaya, the three bodies of the
Buddha, yingshen sometimes denotes the Sambhogakaya, the marvelous
“merit body” or “reward body” that is the emanation of the Dharmakaya,
the absolute/emptiness body of the Buddha. However, both yingshen and
huashen are also used to refer to the Nirmanakaya, the “teaching body”
or “transformation body” of the Buddha that manifests in the world to aid
suffering beings. Robert Sharf shows that by the eighth century, notions
of yingshen and huashen were integral to a lively and complex debate on
the nature of the Buddha, a debate in which there was little consensus
and no clear derivation from Indian sources. However, Sharf argues, Chi-
nese Buddha body theories clearly reflect indigenous philosophical and
cosmological theories of ganying , stimulus-response or sympathetic
resonance.92 This centuries-old protean theory of natural resonance be-
tween like essences was one of the many factors that contributed to an
era of Buddhist experimentation with received notions of image, Dharma-
kaya, Buddha, master, mind, and merit.
It is this idea of sympathetic resonance—and the mysterious resem-
blance that is its visible mark—that allowed the Lidai fabao ji authors to
claim that Wuzhu received Wuxiang’s transmission without being in his
presence. Because they are identified as huashen, as analogous salvific
91These are neologisms and are not actually used in the text.
92Robert H. Sharf, Coming to Terms with Chinese Buddhism: A Reading of the “Treasure
Store Treatise” (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2002), 77–133.

--- Page 39 ---
History of Religions 173
manifestations, they can be understood as continually present to each other.
Their shared wunian, no-thought, which is also Buddha-nature, allows
them to connect with each other in thought. This notion that master and
disciple share a mysterious connection is not a new one, and it was de-
ployed similarly in the Platform Sutra story of Dharma transmission be-
tween the fifth and sixth patriarchs. The Lidai fabao ji authors go further
than most would dare, however, in claiming that mind-to-mind resonance
was the sole means through which Wuzhu was given the transmission
that established him as the single legitimate heir of the true Dharma.
Moreover, the authors also tell an alternative version of the story, one
that they wish to refute. Yet it is due to the Lidai fabao ji narrative that
the need to deny a “false” version is still, twelve hundred years later, as
much a part of the Bao Tang identity as their claim to the true Dharma of
“no-recollection.”
In his article on the dice-playing epic hero Nala, David Shulman play-
fully comments on the desire for a self: “All in all, one would probably
prefer to have a self. Something minimally integrated and not wholly dis-
continuous, where memory, or its more powerful and personal multiform,
forgetting, could reside.”93 Shulman’s insight that forgetting is “more
powerful and personal” than memory as a matrix of identity helps eluci-
date the Bao Tang community’s commemorative portrait. On the conven-
tional level, the Bao Tang were concerned to establish an identity through
a history of their master, set in the context of the history of the Chan
school. Much of the Lidai fabao ji is taken up with defending Wuzhu’s
highly dubious claim to Wuxiang’s lineage, and, as noted, this defense
itself preserves for us the traces of what the Bao Tang wanted everyone
to forget. Through Wuzhu’s portrait-eulogy, and the text in which it is
enshrined, the Bao Tang community hoped to establish the symbolic cap-
ital that would empower their “personal multiform,” their force of forget-
ting, to become history.
Though the Lidai fabao ji authors fashioned their polemical claims with
utmost seriousness, these conventional means were implicitly justified by
their portrait of the ultimate. On the absolute level, no-thought does not
erase the unthinkable history (i.e., that Wuzhu did not actually inherit
Wuxiang’s Dharma); it simply makes it irrelevant. No-thought is both the
self-present truth of inherent Buddha nature and the talismanic symbol of
investiture of those entrusted to teach this truth. The virtue of Wuzhu’s
Dharma of no-thought is then said to be manifested in his portrait after
his death, and the viewer is urged to look to Wuzhu’s image as a direct
source of aid in his or her own realization. This is both a departure from
93David Shulman, “On Being Human in the Sanskrit Epic: The Riddle of Nala,” Journal
of Indian Philosophy 22 (1994): 1.

--- Page 40 ---
174 Representations of Merit
and an appropriation of previous models. Wuzhu’s merit as manifested in
his image is not claimed to be a source of miracles, but rather a source of
the immediacy of Buddha nature. He is not represented as an ancillary
mediator between the human and bodhisattvic realms but as a response
body of the Dharma. His image does not symbolize the collective merit
field of the Sa“gha but rather the no-merit of an antinomian and icono-
clastic Sa“gha. Later, in the Song, the latent paradoxes in Wuzhu’s
portrait-eulogy would be deployed more deliberately, and Chan icono-
clasm and Chan rites of devotion to a lineage of deceased masters were
assimilated into a comprehensive institutional and ritual structure. The
notion that the merit of the salvific image manifests as no-merit and no-
thought thus appears at a curious nexus in the annals of the Buddhist
soteriology of the image.
the image and the work of mourning
In order to draw out further implications of the relationship among
no-thought, no-recollection, and no-merit, I am going to turn now to dis-
cussion of an issue raised in the introduction, namely, the possibility of
interplay between the discourses of Buddhist emptiness and Derridean
“impossibility.” Taking up an inquiry into the ontology of the image that
emerges from a eulogy by Derrida, I will draw out some resonances and
contrasts between this inquiry and the Buddhist soteriology of no-thought
evoked in Wuzhu’s portrait-eulogy. Each of these forms of commemora-
tive writing plays on the themes of the merit of the virtual and the virtue
of the image.
In a recent and perhaps prescient work, The Work of Mourning, Derrida
collected his writings commemorating departed friends and colleagues.
Among his eulogies for the pantheon of major contemporary philosophers
he numbered among his close friends, Derrida’s engagement with Louis
Marin’s work on the work of mourning, Des pouvoirs de l’image: Gloses,
is a key to the collection as a whole and is provocative in the present con-
text.94 In considering the self-deconstructive nature of the “work” of
mourning, Derrida evokes the “law of mourning”—that a work of mourn-
ing succeeds only in failing. Elsewhere he elaborates the impossible
choice between inevitable infidelities to the dead; to appropriate the voice
or effect of the loved one is a kind of narcissism, and to refrain is a be-
trayal of the relationship—“How to leave him alone without abandoning
him?”95 This is a variation on a key Derridean theme: the impossibility
94Louis Marin, Des pouvoirs de l’image: Gloses (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1993).
95Jacques Derrida, The Work of Mourning, ed. Pascale-Anne Brault and Michael Naas
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 225.
One Line Short

--- Page 41 ---
History of Religions 175
and absoluteness of response to death.96 Mourning is this aporia, “work-
ing at its own unproductivity,” work that has to work at getting over its
own force.97
In this light, commemoration and amnesia—the double work of the
Lidai fabao ji—can be seen as trajectories of the Bao Tang community’s
self-affirming or self-interested force of mourning, force that is “in bad
taste” because it attempts “to draw from the dead a supplementary force
to be turned against the living.”98 However, “bad taste” and the faithful
work of mourning are intimately related, even inseparable—both depend
on absorption in the absence of the departed. The likeness of vulgarity
and fidelity is perfectly captured in the iconography of the Buddha’s
parinirvana, in which the ludicrously grief-distorted faces of the dis-
ciples expose their failure to realize no-self and their failure to obey the
last injunctions of the Buddha whose departure they are mourning, yet
this self-forgetful infidelity is also a sign of their fidelity. The Bao Tang
eulogy shows signs of both self-abandonment and self-interest, claiming
that “without our master, this Dharma will sink,” but also defending
his lineage in the strong terms of a group whose survival depended on
acknowledgment of these claims by the Buddhist community.
The Lidai fabao ji eulogy also shows signs of what Derrida terms a
“psychoanalytic” understanding of mourning as interiorization, “an ideal-
izing incorporation, introjection, consumption of the other.” For Louis
Marin, Derrida confides, the paradigmatic mourning interiorization is the
transfiguring consumption of the eucharistic body.99 The Lidai fabao ji is
clearly a work of idealizing incorporation, urging the reader to partake of
Wuzhu’s Dharma and full of the remembrances of those who accepted
the gift. However, intriguing as the notion of an eucharistic Wuzhu may
be, in the terms of his subitist creed of “no-merit” the gift cannot be sac-
rificial, nor even karmic (to recall Egge’s terminology). Interiorization
of the other here demands no-interiorization, but rather a recollection of
one’s own Buddha nature/emptiness, a recollection that is no-recollection,
wuyi.
For Derrida/Marin the question of the “force” of the work of mourning
points to the paradox of death as absolute force that is thereby the place
of utter helplessness, the defenselessness of the dead and of the survivors
in the face of death. Derrida, speaking for Marin, brings his questioning
of “force” to the fore, emphasizing its provocative disturbance of the
96See Jacques Derrida, The Gift of Death, trans. David Wills (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1995).
97Derrida, The Work of Mourning, 144.
98Ibid., 51.
99Ibid., 159.

--- Page 42 ---
176 Representations of Merit
authority of the ontological question. To ask “what is?” of this force that
makes one other to oneself, and makes all others as oneself, is to con-
front the breakdown of the logic of being.100 And it is the power of the
image that most troubles the authority of the logic of being, logic that
would distinguish the image as an inferior being: “To submit the image
to the question ‘what is?’ would thus already be to miss the image and its
force, the image in its force, which has to do perhaps not with what it is
or is not, with the fact that it is not or does not have much being, but with
the fact that its logic or rather its dynamic, its dynamis, the dynasty of its
force, will not submit to an onto-logic.”101 This leads him/us to the shift
in perspective that enables us to suspect ontology or philosophy to have
been constituted precisely in order to mistake the power of the image, to
oppose it, to assert power over and against the image.102
Derrida notes that Marin links dynamis, force, and the virtue of the
image, a linkage that extends to the notion of the virtual. We are told that
in thinking this dynamis (without reference to “being”) it is not necessary
to think of actualization, the virtue of the image, as the destruction of its
potentiality or potency.103 In the context of Buddhist discourse on empti-
ness, of course, there is no Platonic tendency to short-circuit, so this
assurance—or warning—is not needed, for it is orthodox to not think of
actualization as the destruction of potentiality.104 The force of the image
and the force of the person, who is also virtual/empty, are not ontologi-
cally divided. The virtue of the image that is given in the notion of the
transformation-body or of the response-body is in fact a compounding of
potentiality, for it is a manifestation of merit that produces further merit.
Derrida goes on to reflect on the force of the Resurrection and the
image of Christ in Marin’s thought. In particular, it is the image of absence
that lends itself to Marin’s meditation on the power of the virtual, an emp-
tiness, we may say, that allows the power of “imaginal transfiguration” to
work: “and it is in this that its pragmatic and historical force resides, its
foundational efficacity—the absence of the founding body.”105 Derrida
draws attention to and supports Marin’s gesture toward “an intuition of a
100Ibid., 145.
101Ibid.
102Ibid., 145–46.
103Ibid., 146.
104Buddhist exegetes of emptiness have had skirmishes with various forms of onto-logic,
but this history (which has a recent manifestation in the Critical Buddhism controversy) is
too complex to address here. For examples of studies of encounters between emptiness dis-
course and medieval Chinese notions of being, see Robert H. Sharf, Coming to Terms with
Chinese Buddhism: A Reading of the “Treasure Store Treatise”; and Richard H. Robinson,
Early Madhyamaka in India and China (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1978).
105Derrida, The Work of Mourning, 151; direct quote from Marin, Des pouvoirs de l’image:
Gloses.
One Line Short

--- Page 43 ---
History of Religions 177
general essence concerning the nature of representation or imagination in
general, beyond the Christic space.”106
Derrida’s reading of Marin thus appears to pay tribute to his friend’s
thought at the cost of sacrificing his own. At the expense of différence, he
commemorates his friend’s intuitive enshrining of this “image of absence”
as its own source and transcendence. Regarding this source, this “general
essence” (which is a functioning), how can the absence of Christ’s found-
ing body—or the absence of Wuzhu’s founding body—support an in-
tuition of the essential nature of representation without sacrifice of those
particularities, differentials, and deferments that keep their virtues in play?
How can we think the nature of representation as distinguishable from
representations without becoming subject once more to the authority of
ontology—or phenomenology?
In contrast to Marin’s gesture, the nature of representation that animates
the portrait eulogy for Wuzhu was never subject to “onto-logic” and thus
has no need to subvert it. The Bao Tang were subject to different master
discourses and invested in different subversions. In this particular Chan
“space,” which one must acknowledge is provisionally constructed, the
theoretical and efficacious spheres, or the descriptive and performative
work, are not separate. Evoking the image of their deceased master as a
yingshen, a response body or manifestation of the Dharmakaya, the Bao
Tang eulogist acts as both philosopher and ritual master. The living force
of the image of the departed loved one (“the face quivers and wants to
speak”) invites the reader to contemplate the nonduality—or non-
triplicity—of being/nonbeing/image. At the same time, the Lidai fabao ji
eulogy actualizes the virtue of the image, just as painting on the eyes of
a Buddhist statue is a ritual empowerment bringing it to life—“the eyes
dance and are about to see.” And what the image sees/empowers is the
returning of the gaze, redoubled in force: “I look up and it is ever loftier,
I venerate and it is ever more dear.”
The forces at work in the portrait-eulogy for Wuzhu reflect the para-
dox of the “impossibility of the given” alluded to at the outset. In Given
Time, Derrida argues that the donor’s recognition of the gift entails a
symbolic return or gift of equal or greater value, the recognition of one-
self as giving—or, as we might say, gaining merit. Recognition of the gift
as such is its destruction. For there to be gift, it is necessary that gift it-
self not appear to recognition, for there to be an absolute forgetting—“in
such a way that this forgetting, without being something present, present-
able, determinable, sensible or meaningful, is not nothing.”107 The gift is
106Ibid., 152.
107Derrida, Given Time: I. Counterfeit Money, 17.

--- Page 44 ---
178 Representations of Merit
thus a huashen of the work of mourning, they are analogous representa-
tions. Recognition both destroys the gift and makes it impossible not to
give, just as recollection of the departed loved one is a force of destruc-
tion and consumption that is impossible to separate from fidelity. Wuzhu’s
teaching of no-recollection is also marked with this aporia: “At the time
of true no-thought, no-thought itself is not.”108 And how do we know this
no/self-presence of Wuzhu? We know because his disciples were faith-
ful, because they commemorated his refusal of the link between practice
and the gift of merit through their practice of the meritorious work of
mourning.
conclusion
I do not intend to suggest anything like an evolutionary model of offering
and commemorative practices. Rather I have aspired to present scriptural,
representational, and literary examples in order to highlight relation-
ships and disjunctions among notions of merit and merit transfer, the so-
teriology of emptiness, the creation of commemorative images, and the
practice of deconstruction. I have attempted to view these practices as
supplements rather than displacements of one another, without erasing
their contradictions.
In the context of the early Buddhist scriptures, the problems presented
by the potentially personal nature of meritorious gift giving (i.e., gifts
given by a layperson to a monk or nun with whom he or she had a per-
sonal relationship) were addressed by construing the benefit of libera-
tion as far greater than any conceivable offering made to the Sa“gha. This
appropriation and reworking of the social and sacrificial system of obliga-
tory circulation of gifts was ultimately rationalized as the impersonal law
of karma. However, it is important to recognize this foundational tension
at work in further permutations of the Buddhist soteriological understand-
ing of merit and generosity.
Huiyuan’s sixth-century compendium gives us a starting point from
which to appreciate the reception of Mahayana notions of merit and
merit transfer in Chinese Buddhism. From the selections in the fourteenth
fascicle, we can understand the tremendous allure of the image of the in-
exhaustible productivity of the field of merit. However, turning to selec-
tions from the ninth fascicle, we can also discern the tension between the
imaginative appeal of the notion of merit transfer and the need to affirm
the doctrine of the Two Truths, in which the inexhaustible field of merit
is subordinate to the absolute both/neither of emptiness. Though Huiyuan
108Zheng wunian zhi shi wunian bu zi . For one of many examples,
see Lidai fabao ji, T. 51 (2075) 192a22.

--- Page 45 ---
History of Religions 179
presents an orthodox account of merit as provisional, he also takes pains
to support the culturally valued practice of merit transfer to benefit family
members.
In the Dunhuang paintings we see a range of representations of the
dedication and transfer of merit, from the stylized rendering of suppli-
cant donors at the foot of the painting, to the rich evocation of Maitreya’s
heaven, to the individualized inscriptions and portraits on the painting of
Avalokite¶vara. In the latter example, the portraits of the nun Yanhui and
her brother Zhang Youcheng are especially vivid. The inscriptions and
visual representations evoke the deceased siblings, especially Yanhui, in
such a way that they appear to function as mediating figures who both
supplement and propitiate the central image.
The eighth-century portrait-eulogy for the Chan master Wuzhu articu-
lates the notion that the portrait of a deceased master is a manifestation
of the Chan Dharma, offering immediate access to realization of one’s
true nature. But at the same time, Bao Tang iconoclasts rejected the tra-
ditional practice of making offerings to Buddhist images in order to gain
merit and relieve worldly suffering. In the Song period this paradox
would become institutionalized; portrait-eulogies developed into witty
inscriptions written by the subjects themselves, while Chan monasteries
maintained offerings to Buddhist images in their main halls, and offerings
to deceased masters in their lineage halls. This is analogous to the con-
trast and coexistence of literary representations of Chan antinomian
antics with the fairly traditional style of practice maintained in Chan
monasteries.
Derrida’s sacrifice of différence in order to pay tribute to Louis Marin’s
intuition of essence is a gift and a fidelity that he himself would no doubt
have deconstructed with pleasure. One could say, however, that the sac-
rifices required in the practice of deconstruction are also a kind of upaya,
skillful means. Sacrifice of intuitions of a “nature in general,” or sacrifice
of notions of pure experience or pure gift, are also offerings and “provi-
sional means” through which the lack of inherent self-identities emerges.
However, as Glass put it, there needs to be a rip in Indra’s net. One also
sacrifices the soteriological intuition of this lack, this image of absence,
as a means to liberation and ultimate truth. Yet there is undeniably a dif-
ficult fidelity required in attempting to trace interdependence, differential
self-referentiality, and nonclosure at work in a set of representations, while
at the same time continuing to recognize the inevitable infidelity and self-
interest involved in the construction of subjects and relationships. It is an
expression of this challenge that although one may practice these provi-
sional means of deconstruction via Derridean différence and/or Buddhist
emptiness, in order to “give them up without abandoning them,” they must
remain irreconcilable.

--- Page 46 ---
180 Representations of Merit
Merit and no-merit, nianfo and wunian, and commemoration and de-
construction can provisionally be made to supplement each other, to refer
to each other, and to refer to the irreconcilable distinction of a given
practice over and above any other. Images of the deceased supplement
and refer to the images of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas, which supple-
ment and refer to the emptiness of giver/gift/recipient and to the aporia
of the gift of merit. Such ideal excess recalls the soteriology of the
Dakkinavibhanga–sutta, in which there is a surplus of types of offering
that result in more immeasurable merit than any other type of offering.
However, this utopia is a sign of its impossibility—wherein we may find
Wuzhu’s “At the time of true no-thought, no-thought itself is not,” and
Derrida’s “this forgetting, without being something present, presentable,
determinable, sensible or meaningful, is not nothing.”
Barnard College/Columbia University