--- Page 1 ---
Pierre Bourdieu and the sociologyof religion:
A central and peripheral concern1
ERWANDIANTEILL
EŁcoledesHautesEŁtudesenSciencesSociales
(AndrewWallis,translator,WhittierCollege)
Abstract. Although some of Bourdieu’s most basic concepts have their roots in the
sociologyofreligion,religionitselfhas,inappearance,onlyamarginalizedstatuswithin
hiswork.Thisarticlefocusesonthegenesisofreligious¢eldandhowthetheoriesof
Durkheim, Mauss, and Weber fold into the notion of ¢eld de¢ned by Bourdieu.
Religious¢eldmustbeunderstoodwithinthesymbolic economyaswell;divisionsof
symbolic labor are therefore discussed in relation to segmented and non-segmented
societies.Finally,Bourdieu’sanalysisofinstitutions,inparticulartheCatholicChurch,
furtherhelpusunderstandtheuseandevolutionofreligious¢eldinhisworkandshed
lightonthesociologist’sunderstandingofthemovementfromreligiousbeliefstoward
aestheticones.
Religion hasthe statusofa‘‘paradoxicalobject’’intheworkofPierre
Bourdieu. The articles that address the topic directly are very few in
number, and none of his major works tackles this subject. Compared
to the sociology of art, culture, or education, the study of power or
socialdeprivation,thesociologyofreligionoccupiesamarginalspace
withintheBourdieucorpus.Yetcertainofhismostimportantconcepts
come out of the social sciences of religion. Inherited from Mauss or
Durkheim, the concept of belief, which is a condition of existence of
any ¢eld, is a manifest example. Even the elaboration of this latter
concept, according to Bourdieu, springs from intermeshing research
on the sociology of art begun around1960 and the ‘‘beginning of the
chapterdevotedtoreligioussociologyinWirtschaftundGesellschaft’’2
by Weber. He writes: ‘‘I constructed the notion of ¢eld both against
Weber and withWeber, by thinking about the analysis he proposes of
therelationsbetweenpriest,prophetandsorcerer.’’3Anotherexample
can be found in the reading of Erwin Panofsky’s Gothic Architecture
and Scholasticism in which Bourdieu forged the de¢nition of habitus.
Indeed, in1967, Bourdieu translates this text, one chapter of which is
dedicatedto‘‘thehabit-formingforce’’inthecaseofeducationandthe
TheoryandSociety32:529^549,2003.
(cid:1)2003KluwerAcademicPublishers.PrintedintheNetherlands.

--- Page 2 ---
530
commoncultureofCatholicclericsandthearchitectsofthecathedrals
aroundParis.Thehomologyofstructurebetweenmedievalphilosophy
and gothic architecture originates according to Panofsky within a
common habitus. In the epilogue written by Bourdieu, one ¢nds for
oneofthe¢rsttimesinhisworkanexplicitde¢nitionofhabitus:4
A system of schema [that] constantly orient choices, which, though not
deliberate, are nonetheless systematic; which, without being arranged and
organized expressly according to an ultimate end, are nonetheless imbued
withasortof¢nalitythatrevealsitselfonlypostfestum.5
Habitusisthusde¢nedasa‘‘systemofthoughtschemes,ofperception
and of action,’’ a ‘‘modus operandi.’’6 This last expression, coming
directlyfromscholasticphilosophy,istakenupagaininalittle-known
text7inwhichBourdieu makesa completediagram oftheoppositions
amongobjectivism,subjectivism,andhisown‘‘theoryofpractice.’’He
de¢nes the‘‘modusoperandi’’ (habitus) as theveryobjectofsociology
itself and it is as such that he intends to undertake its study. It is
therefore inside the history of medieval art and philosophy impreg-
natedwithCatholicismthattheFrenchsociologist¢ndsthemodelfor
one of his principal concepts. In Bourdieu’s work, the notions of
‘‘belief,’’ ‘‘¢eld,’’or ‘‘habitus’’always result from the social sciences of
religion (sociology, anthropology, and history). From this point of
view, Bourdieu’s work is almost a‘‘generalized’’ sociology of religion
(with religion presenting in paradigmatic fashion properties common
to all spheres of symbolic activity). In this perspective, David Swartz
clearly shows to what extent Bourdieu’s sociology of culture is a
tributaryofthesociologyofreligion.8
The goal of this article is to present Bourdieu’s contribution to the
socialsciencesofreligionwhileconcurrentlyreadinghisanthropologi-
calandsociologicalcorpus.Canonespeakof ‘‘religion’’insocietiesin
which institutional religions do not exist or are exceptionally weak-
ened? Does the notion of religious ¢eld remain pertinent in non-
segmented or increasinglysecular societies? Or, in other words, is the
‘‘religious’’limitedtothereligious¢eld?
The study of Bourdieu’s works suggests negative responses to these
questions.The sociological validity of the concept of religious ¢eld is
limited by the absence of a monopoly of symbolic production in
certain agrarian societies on the one hand, and the growing uncer-
taintyaboutthelimitsof¢eldontheother.Thislatterisnotablydueto
theappearanceofnewprofessionsspecializinginthe‘‘symbolicwork’’

--- Page 3 ---
531
and to the ‘‘de-coupling’’ of belief and institutional allegiance. In
Bourdieu’s ethnographic enterprise, it appears that the symbolic in-
formstheentiretyofsociallifewithouttheexistenceofanautonomous
institution that would allow for a‘‘religious ¢eld.’’9 What then forms
the institutional space of religion from a social space that possesses
little di¡erentiation?10 In fact, religious ¢eld seems to correspond
precisely to the historic occidental religions, notably the Judaism and
Catholicism analyzed in the dialectic between internal and external
relations, and a certain ‘‘dissolution of the religious’’ that can be
observed in occidental societies today.11 I return in the conclusion to
the paradox cited earlier whose elucidation exposes the limits of
Bourdieu’s sociologyofreligion: why, when the studyofreligious acts
is at the heart of his principal concepts, does religion occupy such a
marginalspacewithinhiswork?
Thesocialgenesisofthereligious¢eld
According to Bourdieu, three major sociological theories of religion
exist,symbolizedbythreenames:Marx,Weber,andDurkheim.These
theories seem mutually exclusive. It therefore becomes a question of
‘‘situatingoneselfinthegeometricspaceofdi¡erentperspectives,that
istosay,inthepointthatallowsforperceptionofwhatcanandcannot
be perceived from each point of view.’’12 What thought processes
remain from these three perspectives? Durkheim’s contribution is
explicitly expressed by Bourdieu while Marx’s and Weber’s seem less
clearlydistinguishable.
From Durkheim’s Elementary Forms of The Religious Life, Bourdieu
retains the ideathatthe sociologyofreligion mustbe considered as a
dimension of the sociology of knowledge. Religion is an instrument
bothofcommunicationandknowledge;itallowsforharmonybetween
themeaningofsignsandthemeaningoftheworld.Ithasforfunction
thelogicalandsocialintegrationof ‘‘collectiverepresentations’’and,in
particular,thatofreligious‘‘formsofclassi¢cation.’’13
Weber’s contribution to the sociology of religious ¢eld is decisive,
becauseitlaysthegroundworkforescapingfromthesterilealternative
arising between religious subjectivism and unmediated Marxist re-
ductionism.14 Also from Weber comes the idea that the sociology of
religion is a dimension of the sociology of power; mythic discourse
must be attached to the religious interest of those who produce,

--- Page 4 ---
532
disseminate, and receive it. A historical genesis exists for the special-
ized religious bodies, the clerics, constituting the foundation of the
religious ¢eld’s relative autonomy. These religious professionals have
strategies for obtaining a monopoly of hierocratic constraint, of the
goods of salvation. The religious ¢eld therefore appears as the com-
plete system of positions between religious agents, their objective
competitiverelationsortheirtransactions.15
Finally, it seems that Bourdieu keeps Marx’s notion of ideology as a
‘‘trans¢guration of social rapports into supernatural rapports, thus
inscribed in the nature of things and justi¢ed by them.’’16 Religion
assumes, in this perspective, a political function of conserving social
order. It is di⁄cult to di¡erentiate between Marx’s and Weber’s
in£uence to the extentthatboth place the sociologyofreligionwithin
thecon¢nesofpoliticalandeconomicsociology.
InTheLogicofPractice,argumentsaboutmagicareespeciallycloseto
the Durkheimian problematic and are even more precisely Maussian.
In ‘‘Genesis and structure of the religious ¢eld,’’ Marx and Weber
dominate.
Theomnipresentsymbolicinagrariansocieties:TheLogicofPractice
In The Logic of Practice, a synthesis of Bourdieu’s anthropological
works, ‘‘religion’’ is less an issue than rituals, magic, institutions of
magic,andillocutionaryforce,andparticularcasesofsymbolicpower
(theword‘‘religion’’isnotablyabsentfromthethematicindexasisthe
word ‘‘symbol’’). Kabyle society, organized around agricultural jobs
andalimitednumberofcraftactivities(suchasweaving,aspeci¢cally
female occupation), is not familiar with autonomous clerics, but it is
integrally structured by the‘‘demon of analogy,’’a system of schemas
constitutedbybinaryoppositionswhoseinitialpartition‘‘counterposes
maleandfemale,dryandwet,hotorcold....’’17Closetothestructur-
alism of Le¤vi-Strauss in the analysis of logical principles organizing
‘‘savage thought,’’18 Bourdieu distances himself from it through his
enhanced attention to the incorporated dispositions, which generate
symbolicpracticesthatareimperfectlysystematic.
According to him, one can completely understand ‘‘all the practices
and ritual symbols on the basis of two operational schemes which,
being natural processes culturally constituted in and through ritual

--- Page 5 ---
533
practice, are indissolubly logical and biological, like the natural pro-
cessestheyaim toreproduce (inboth senses)whentheyare conceived
in terms of magical logic. On the one hand, there is the reuniting of
separated contraries, of which marriage, plowing and quenching are
exemplary cases, and which engenders life, as the realized reunion of
contraries; and, on the other hand, there is the separation of reunited
contraries, with, for example, the sacri¢ce of the ox and harvesting,
enactedasdeniedmurders.’’19Yetifthelogicofritualcallsforjoining
or separating contraries, it also requires that the transgressions they
objectivelysignifybemadesociallyacceptable.
Magic thus functions as a collective denial of necessary acts of trans-
gression(joiningthedisjointedorsplittingtheuni¢ed).Withoutthese,
theseparatedcontrarieswouldremainsterile.Transgressionallowsfor
the reproductionofthevitalorder, the reproduction ofthegroup, but
itisexcessivelydangerousandrequiresthereforeacollectiveconstruc-
tion, public andpractical, denying the objective meaningofrite. How
canthecontraryexigenciesberituallyreconciled?Thepracticalmean-
ingatworkinthelegitimatemagicofrites,whichmakessymbolicacts
oftransgressionacceptable,isinfactadoublemeaning:a⁄rmationof
unity in the separation of contraries; a⁄rmation of the separation in
their uni¢cation. The joining of contradictory principles can only be
realized in authorization accorded circularly to the group and by the
groupatthemomentoftheritual:
Thewholetruthofcollectivemagicandbeliefiscontainedinthisgameof
two-foldobjectivetruth,adoublegameplayedwithtruth,throughwhichthe
group,thesourceofallobjectivity,inasenseliestoitselfbyproducingatruth
whosesolefunctionandmeaningaretodenyatruthknownandrecognized
byall,aliethatwoulddeceivenoone,werenoteveryonedeterminedtobe
mistaken.... In the case of the harvest, the social truth to be collectively
deniedisunambiguous:harvesting(thamegra)isamurder(thamgert,desig-
nates the throat, violent death, revenge; and amgar, the sickle), through
which the earth, fertilized by ploughing, is stripped of the fruits it has
broughttomaturity.20
InKabylesociallife,ritesoflicitationthatimplya(denied)solutionof
continuity are balanced by propitiatory rites. Their logic is one of
‘‘management’’oftheantagonismthatthreatensthenaturalandsocial
order. They permit the transition between opposing principles, in
particular the trouble-free passage from one period of the year to
another:thefeminizationofthemasculineinautumn,themasculiniza-
tion of the feminine in spring, summer and winter being symbolically
purelymasculineandfeminine.

--- Page 6 ---
534
In The Logic of Practice, the heuristic value of the distinction made
between magic and religion is denied, for this opposition must be
understoodasthestakesofasymbolicstrugglethathasnothingtodo
with Kabyle society. Use of the term ‘‘magic’’ aims to disqualify, in
segmented societies, the symbolic practices of the dominated, the
dominatorsreservingforthemselvestheterm‘‘religion.’’Thesecatego-
ries are inseparable from the creation of a religious ¢eld, with its
competing stakes among priests, sorcerers, and prophets in Europe
and the Near East. They are not relevant in societies with little
segmentation. Bourdieu writes: ‘‘The institution of licit (lah’lal) peri-
ods or moments, the mandatingofpersonswho serve as‘screens’ (the
family charged with opening the plowing, inaugural parallel-cousin
marriages,etc.)andtheorganizationofmajorcollectiveceremoniesin
which the group authorizes itself, are three aspects of the same
operation, which is essential to all legitimate ritual (one confuses
everythingbyidentifyingthedistinctionbetweenlegitimateandillegit-
imate magic with the ^ socially contested ^ distinction between
religion and magic).The authority the group grants itself, either as a
wholeorinthepersonofoneofitsmandatedmembers,isthebasisof
theillocutionaryforceatworkinallsocialrituals.’’21
The preceding analysis exhibits accents that are clearly Maussian.
Magic has a social foundation ^ belief ^ and a social e⁄ciency that
areassociatedwithit:‘‘Inde¢nitive,’’writesMauss,‘‘itisalwayssociety
that pays itself in the forged moneyof its dream.The synthesis of the
cause and e¡ect onlyoccurs in public opinion....We should consider
magic as a system of a priori inductions, used under the pressure of
need by groups of individuals.’’22 Likewise, magic, for Mauss and
Hubert, is ‘‘at once an opus operatum in terms of the magic and an
opus inoperans in terms of technique.’’23 This same idea is taken up
andgeneralizedbyBourdieu:‘‘Thespeci¢callymagic characterofthis
completelysocialforceisinvisiblesolongasitisexercisedonlyonthe
socialworld,separatingorunitingindividualsorgroupswithfrontiers
orbonds(marriage)nolessmagicthanthoseinstitutedbytheknifeor
the knot in magic, transmuting the social value of things (like the
fashiondesigner’slabel)orpersons(liketheeducationalquali¢cation).
On the other hand, it appears quite openly when, in a kind of
innocence,con¢dence,abandonmentimposedbyextremedistressand
disarray,groupsattempttousethepowerthattheygivethemselves,in
one of the circular operations which are the basis of the entirely
e⁄cacious magic ofthe collective, beyond itslimits ofvalidity, thatis,
on the natural world thatdoes not depend on the group butonwhich
thegroupdepends.’’24

--- Page 7 ---
535
In summary, Bourdieu’s anthropological works stress the social con-
ditionsofritee⁄ciencyoutsidethereligious¢eld,whichisabsentfrom
Kabyle society.There are noinstitutionalized intermediaries (itwould
seem) between the group and itself: there of course exist families
responsible for cutting the ¢rst wheat sheaves of the harvest, for
example, but this function is not constant. The religious institutions
whosegenesisandstructureBourdieustudiesplayanentirelydi¡erent
socialrole.
Theconstitutionofreligiousinstitutions:‘‘Genesisandstructureof
thereligious¢eld’’
Bourdieu’s sociology of religion is, ¢rst and foremost, a sociology of
Catholicism.Theaccentthusfallsontheprocessofmonopolizationof
powerbyasingleinstitution:TheCatholicChurch.Fromthispointof
view, the highest concentration of hierocratic power is reached in
Western Europe before the Reformation. It is the genesis of this
monopolizationthatmostinterestsBourdieu.Thequestionof compe-
titionbetweenclerics,newandold,comesinsecondtoinquiriesabout
the emergence of a central religious power within Christianity. This
modern competition is,onthe contrary, ofgreatimportancetoNorth
American sociology, which often focuses on religious pluralism, pro-
cessesoffusionanddivisionofdenominations,andreligiousindividu-
alism, the federal government guaranteeing religious freedom and
refusing all support to a single religion ever since the eighteenth
century. From this point of view, Bourdieu’s sociology of religion
clearly depends on a particular social situation, namely the existence
inFranceofaquasi-monopolisticreligionthathasmaintainedorganic
linkswiththestateforseveralcenturies.
Toexplainthisprocessofconcentration,theFrenchsociologistgetshis
inspiration largely from MaxWeber’s works on ancient Judaism and
the emergence of Christianity. For Bourdieu, the ‘‘separation of in-
tellectual labor and material labor’’ is at the origin of two intimately
linked processes that can be quali¢ed as subjective and objective: the
creationofreligious¢eldononehand,and,ontheother,theprocessof
rationalization of beliefs and rites. In the footsteps of Max Weber,
Bourdieu recalls how closely tied religious conduct is to the natural
vicissitudes of rural life for the peasantry, whereas urbanization
encourages a ‘‘rationalization’’ and ‘‘moralization of religious needs
relativelyindependentfromnaturalconditions.25Whatismore,urbani-

--- Page 8 ---
536
zation promotes the development of a corps of professionals dealing
with salvation goods. City clergy contribute to the internalization of
faith,totheintroductionofethicalcriteria ^ of ‘‘good’’and‘‘evil,’’the
notion of ‘‘sin’’ ^ at least in the Judeo-Christian context. To the
conjunction of priests’ interests with those of certain categories of
urban laity can also be attributed the domination of monotheism in
Palestine,andinJerusaleminparticular.
Thetwoprecedingprocesseshaveseveralcorrelations:theconstitution
of a religious ¢eld that is relatively autonomous and characterized by
the production, reproduction, and di¡usion of religious goods and
services, and also by a growing institutional complexity; the ‘‘morali-
zation’’ of religious practices and representations likewise character-
izes religious ¢eld. One thus goes from myth to religious ideology
(monopolizationofthehierocraticconstraintbyacorpsofprofession-
als); from taboo to sin (transfer of the notion of impurity from the
magical order to the moral order); from avengeful God to a just and
goodGod(attributionofincreasingly‘‘social’’qualitiestodivinity).26
The constitution of a religious ¢eld is accompanied by the disposses-
sionofreligiouscapitaloflaymentowardsagroupofreligiousspecial-
istswhoproduce and reproduce abodydeliberatelyorganized around
secret knowledge. It can thus be said that di¡erent social formations
fall between two poles: popular religious self-consumption and spe-
cialists who monopolize religious production completely. These two
extreme positions are de¢ned by the opposition between a practical
masteryof thought schemata acquired through simple familiarization
on the one hand, and, on the other hand, conscious savant mastery,
acquiredthrough intentionalandinstitutionalizedpedagogicalaction.
Theyalso acquire structurethrough ritual-myth systems and religious
ideologies ^ that is, literate reinterpretations ofthese systemsaccord-
ing tointernal orexternal interestslinked tothe constitution ofstates
andtoclassantagonisms.27
It should be noted that even in the case of societies with little di¡er-
entiation, Bourdieu suggests importing methods of sociology into
ethnology: the latter must go beyond culturalism and conceive of
religionasasocialfacttiedtoothersocialphenomena,notablytothe
division of labor. Ethnology must be able to incorporate mythic or
religious discourse into its social conditions of production while con-
centrating in particular on the formation and characteristics of priv-
ileged agents of magico-religious activity. Of course, this does not

--- Page 9 ---
537
meanthat collective religious representations mustbe evacuated from
the ¢eld of research; it is simply a matter of understanding their
relativeautonomywithinthegeneralsocialstructure.
Finally, the oppositions separating profane from sacred and magic
from religion are the symbolic translations of the monopolization by
the clergy at the expense of the laity of relations to the supernatural.
Calling a practice ‘‘profane’’ or ‘‘magic’’ is a way for the clergy to
disqualify it, and above all to disqualify the group practicing it. The
notion of magic is therefore an accusatory category used to devalue
religiouspracticesconsideredillegitimate,particularlythepracticesof
conquered peoples or social outcasts. During the Christianization of
Europe,forexample,paganreligionswereattackedthisway.Tospeak
of ‘‘magic’’alsogivesonethemeanstolabelactsofprotestdeemedas
willfully profaning dominant religion (e.g., inverting the cruci¢x,
unbridled sexuality of midnight revels, unorthodox reading of the
Bible) bycertain dominated groupswho see in such inverted religious
formsameansofoverthrowingthesocialhierarchy.ForBourdieu,the
‘‘religion/magic’’distinction is ofapolitical nature; itillustrates those
‘‘classi¢cation struggles’’ that always accompany class struggle. In
other words, one can deduce, from the progress of the division of
religious labor and the history of the religious ¢eld, the distinctions
betweenfundamentalcategoriesofreligiousthoughtandpractice.
Structuringandde-structuringofreligious¢eld
The process of autonomy for religious ¢eld does not imply absolute
independence vis-a'-vis temporal authorities, in particular political
ones. In Bourdieu’s sociology, here very in£uenced by Marxism,
perhaps even by Althusser’s version of it, religious practices and
representations contribute primarily to an essentially conservative
‘‘visionoftheworld.’’Theyrendertherelativeabsolutewhilelegitimat-
ingthearbitrary nature ofdomination.Also,from thesocialoriginof
religious personnel and their trajectory within the institution ^ one
example of which can be found in the structure and history of the
‘‘corps’’ of bishops in the French Catholic church28 ^ Bourdieu
attemptstoexplainatoncethehomogeneityoftheepiscopateandthe
division of religious labor at its heart, this division allowing the
institutiontorespondtoreligiousdemand.

--- Page 10 ---
538
Religiousinterestsandsocialfunctionofthereligious(internal
relations,externalrelations)
A properly religious interest exists. It can be de¢ned in a ‘‘strictly
sociological manner, i.e., as the legitimizing expression of a social
position.’’29 During the 1990s, Bourdieu gave a feminist twist to this
Marxist inspiration: religion plays a role in legitimizing male domi-
nance over women.. ‘‘The Church,’’ he writes without nuance, is
‘‘inhabitedbythe profound antifeminism ofthe clergy’’and it‘‘explic-
itlyinculcates(orinculcated)afamilialmoralityentirelydominatedby
patriarchalvalues.’’30Itshouldbeaddedthat,incertaincases,religion
(or, more exactly, magic) can allow for an (illusory) solution to social
su¡ering:‘‘Magicalhopeistheaimforthefuturethatbelongstothose
who have no future.... Revolutionary millennialism and magical
utopia are the sole aim for the future available to a class lacking an
objective future.’’31 Religious interest, as de¢ned by Bourdieu, is the
operator of homology between the religious ¢eld and the general
structureofsocialrapports.
Relativelyautonomouscomparedtosocialstructure,thereligious¢eld
is ordered by both internal and external stakes. The positions of
powers inthe¢eld result from the confrontation of ‘‘religiousdemand
(i.e.,thereligiousinterestsofdi¡erentgroupsorclassesoflaymen)and
religious o¡er (i.e., the more or less orthodox or heretical religious
services).’’32Thepositionofpowerthatareligiousformationoccupies
withinthe¢elddependsonthepowerofthesocialgroupfromwhichit
draws its support.This support, in a dialectical relationship, depends
in turn on the position of the group of producers in the ¢eld. This
relationship explains the observed homologyofstructure between the
social and religious ¢elds: the dominants of the religious ¢eld base
their domination on that of the dominant classes of the social order,
whileprophetscountondominatedgroupsinordertomodifythestate
ofpowerrelationswithinthe¢eld.Likewise,theactionoftheprophet
isstimulationforreformingreligious¢eldaswellassocialstructure.It
appears therefore that the ‘‘functioning’’ of the religious ¢eld is the
productofaninternalrivalrybetweendi¡erentparties(themainones
being the Church, prophets, sects, and magicians) and their relation-
shipwiththelinesofforceinthegeneralarchitectureofsocialrelation-
ships.
One speci¢c case studiedbyBourdieu seemsparticularly relevant: the
groupofFrenchbishopsattheendofthe1970s.

--- Page 11 ---
539
Thesocialoriginsofbishopsande¡ectsontheorganizationofthe
CatholicChurch
The partnership between Bourdieu and Monique de Saint-Martin
explores a limited number of dimensions opened by the1971articles.
It is principally a question of understanding the processes that lead
bishopsasagrouptodenyallinternaldi¡erentiationcorrespondingto
their socialorigin.Goingbeyondthe image ofhomogeneity produced
bythebodyofprofessionals,onecanassociatesocialclassoriginwith
thepositionoccupiedinsideoftheecclesiasticalinstitution,aslongas
one alsotakes into accountstructural deformations:‘‘the same dispo-
sitions possibly leading to positions and di¡erent or even opposing
stances in di¡ering states of ¢eld, which instigates weakening, if not
the cancellation of the statistical relationship with the original class.’’
Inotherwords,nomechanicalrelationshipexistsbetweensocialorigin
andpositionwithintheChurch.
In these conditions, analysis reveals two groups in the Episcopal
corpus:‘‘on the one hand, the‘oblates,’ who, dedicated to the Church
sinceearlychildhood,investtotallyintheinstitutiontowhichtheyowe
everything, who are prepared to give all to the institutions that gave
them everything and without which they would be nothing. On the
otherhand,thebishopswho,ordainedlater,owned,beforetheirentry
into the Church, not only inherited social capital but also signi¢cant
educational capital, and who held because of this a more distant
relationship(arelationshiplessdirectedtowardthetemporal)towards
theinstitution,itshierarchyanditsstakes.’’33The stancesheldbythis
lattergroupcanonlybeunderstoodbytakinghistoricalevolutioninto
account.Thesame‘‘aristocratic’’habitusthatcharacterizedthe‘‘inher-
itors,’’who in the past would have de¢ned the role ofthe hieratic and
solemnbishop,cannowleadtotheavoidanceofappointmentsthatare
too common, to the acceptance of ‘‘missionary’’ dioceses, or to the
search for theologian status.The opposition between the two catego-
ries is formal and non-substantial: ‘‘the antagonists ... can exchange
their position in completely good faith: if one of them, usually the
dominant one, who has the privilege of audacity, decides to change,
thentheothercanonlymaintaintheoppositionbychangingtoo.’’34
How does the body of bishops position itself ‘‘in the ¢eld of religious
power, and more generally in the ¢eld of symbolic power’’35? The
bishops are in some ways ‘‘caught in the cross¢re’’: they oppose, on
one hand, the central political power of ecclesiastical organisms,

--- Page 12 ---
540
showing little interest in local realities; and, on the other hand, they
oppose theologians and monks, who are oriented towards ‘‘central
symbolic power ... less occupied by temporal things that preoccupy
those‘responsible.’’’36 Assuming this median position in the Catholic
church, bishops can fullyaccomplishtheworkofuni¢cationthatthey
arechargedwith.Theircohesionisreinforcedbycommondispositions
(theyareallmen,oftenfromlargefamilies,andborninsmallvillages)
and a homogenizing education.Thus, the episcopate forms a ¢eld of
moderatecompetition.37
The adjustment between religious supply and demand is not the
product of a transaction, as Max Weber envisioned, but rather the
e¡ectof an involuntaryhomologyofstructure,‘‘each cleric producing
according to his trajectory and his position a product more or less
adjusted to the demand of a particular category of laymen.’’38 The
Church,asa¢eld,isde¢nedbyitsunityanditsdiversity.Thisapparent
contradiction results in fact from a large capacity of adaptation: it
enablestheChurch‘‘totreatassimilarlyaspossibleaclientele[thatis]
distributed(varyingaccordingtotime)betweensocialclasses,sexand
age groups, or to treat as di¡erently as possible the clients who,
however di¡erent they are, share their Catholicism.’’39 This capacity
totreat di¡erentdemandsunder the appearance ofunity is reinforced
by the intrinsically polysemic religious discourse that hides behind a
single discourse a plurality of meanings related to di¡erent social
positions, thus reinforcing the subjective confusion ofobjective social
limits. Religious discourse tends to deny social con£icts or at least to
euphemize them. Bourdieu even a⁄rms that discursive procedures of
double meaning and euphemism are ‘‘profoundly characteristic of
religiousdiscourseinitsuniversality.’’40
This trans¢guration of power relationships, in particular economic
ones, by the dominating religious agents is illustrated by the manage-
ment by the episcopate of the professional demands of laymen who
workfortheChurchandwhoareontheborderlinebetweenvolunteers
andwage-earners.ThehierarchydeniestheeconomyoftheChurchas
one governed by economic laws, that is to say, one based on salary,
price,andthelawofsupplyanddemand.‘‘Thelaughofbishops,’’when
exposedtoadiscoursethattreatstheChurchasabusiness,revealsthe
‘‘truth of the religious enterprise, which is to have two truths: an
economic one and a religious one, which denies the ¢rst.’’41 The
episcopate’s laughter is a reaction to an incongruity, one that is
unveiledtothem, andonethatis not without foundation, becausethe

--- Page 13 ---
541
lay church sta¡ members theydependon are in realitya cheap source
oflabor.
All in all, Bourdieu conceives of the Church as an ensemble of
mechanisms and processes legitimizing a social position and present-
ing itself under an objecti¢ed form, be it material (buildings, clothes,
liturgical instruments, etc.), or be it in the form of social technology
(canon law, liturgy, theology, etc.). At the incorporated stage, the
Church is consubstantial to the Catholic habitus generated by the
Christian familyand consecratedbyrites of institutionthat aggregate
while separating. ‘‘In the end, the Church only exists as a living
institution, that is to say one that can act and assume its own
reproduction within the relation between its two modes of incarna-
tion....’’42
Towardsadissolutionofthereligious¢eld?
Without speaking of evolutionism in its classical sense, Bourdieu’s
religioussociologyisnonethelesscharacterizedbythespecialattention
paid to historical processes concerning the constitution of religious
institutions.Thoseprocessesarenotrealizedindependentlyofgeneral
changesa¡ectingsocialstructure(forexample,progressinthedivision
of labor and urbanization). Bourdieu does not use the concept of
‘‘religious ¢eld’’ with regard to agrarian societies such as the Kabyles
because they lack, according to him, institutions and specialized
professionals. Thus, can we talk about ‘‘religion’’ if there is no ‘‘reli-
gious ¢eld’’? It might be preferable to select terms like ‘‘symbol’’ or
‘‘ritual,’’ because those two concepts do not imply the existence of
religiousinstitutions.Concerningthesymbolicactivity,onecannotuse
thesametermsforagrariansocieties(thatarelessdi¡erentiatedandin
whichthe‘‘demonofanalogy’’informsanduni¢esallthedimensionsof
thesocialstructure)andforsocietiesthatarestronglysegmented(where
symbolic production is concentrated around speci¢c and relatively
autonomous institutional spaces, of which religious ¢eld constitutes
oneofthemainones).
Paradoxically, modern societies characterized by a high degree of
social division of labor are also the ones in which historic religions,
and in particular Catholicism, are in decline. A ‘‘dissolution of the
religious’’ appears: ‘‘One can see a rede¢nition of the limits of the
religious ¢eld, the dissolution of the religious in a larger ¢eld is

--- Page 14 ---
542
accompanied by a loss of the monopoly of the cure of souls in its
former sense, at least at the level of the bourgeois clientele.’’43 The
limitsofthereligiousarenotclearlyde¢nedanymore:certainprofane
professions, psychologists, analysts, or marital counselors replace
clergyintheirtherapeuticfunction.InadialoguewithJacquesMaitre,
author of numerous books of social psychopathology applied to indi-
viduals deeply involved in Catholicism, Bourdieu declares that ‘‘it is
very possible that psychoanalysis today, in the general consciousness,
takes on a function quite analogous to what religion was’’44 for these
persons. Thus,‘‘...religious ¢eld has been dissolved into a ¢eld of a
largersymbolicmanipulation....’’45
Ontheonehand,therefusalofblindobediencetotheprescriptionsof
clerics comes from an increase in instructional level, which leads less
toarejectionofareligious‘‘posture’’thantoarejectionofthespiritual
delegation. This (relative) denial of the legitimacy granted to the
Catholic institution thus contributes to the development of autono-
mous sects,tothe‘‘gatheringofcharismaticlittle prophets,’’and more
generally, to a disjunction between cultural orthodoxy and actual
practices and beliefs. As a consequence, the legitimacy of the institu-
tional religious word competes with new forms oflegitimacyand new
professions thatoften rest upon a pseudo-scienti¢c discourse, such as
astrologists, numerologists, or graphologists, for example. The for-
merly dominant clergy becomes dominated by clergy who claim
scienti¢cauthority(toimposevaluesandtruthsthatinfactareneither
moreorlessscienti¢cthanthoseofthepastauthorities).46
The emergence of an aesthetic feeling towards representations whose
original goal is to arouse faith is also a clue to the regression of
‘‘religiousbelief’’vis-a'-vis‘‘aestheticbelief.’’Inasameplace(theSanta
Maria Novella church observed by the sociologist in 1982), practices
simultaneously dealing with museography and devotion are juxta-
posed, which shows the heterogeneity of the public’s aims in the
‘‘admiration’’of a ‘‘Virgin with a Rosary’’or of the ‘‘Presentation to
the Temple.’’ The devotional use of statues and icons has not yet
completely disappeared but it is more concerned with works whose
characteristicsarelessformal,thosethat‘‘haveanexpressivefunction
oftherepresentationoftheirreferents.’’47
Itshould¢nallybenotedthatthe‘‘dissolutionofthereligious’’doesnot
mean, for the sociologist, a regression towards an undi¡erentiated
state of symbolic activity. The ‘‘new symbolic agents,’’ which are

--- Page 15 ---
543
located outside of the religious institution, coexist with a Catholic
institution tending to become a‘‘church without any faithful,’’48 who
oftenopposeit,butwhoalsocontributetoimprovethepositionofthe
Church,ascanbeseen,forexample,bythein£uenceofpsychoanalysis
on modern religious thought.The symbolic activity at the margins of
the religious ¢eld, which fosters a certain confusion concerning its
limits,doesnot,however,signifyitsdisappearance.
Conclusion:Dignityandindignityofreligionasanobjectofsocial
science
Symbolic power ^ certainly not limited to the religious domain ^ is
practicedinitmore clearlythaninother¢eldsofsocialactivities,and
that is probably why a main part of the architecture of Bourdieu’s
sociologyhasbeen constructedaroundthestudyofreligion.Symbolic
power is indeed what enables the constitution of givens through its
enunciation,‘‘tomakevisibleandtomakebelievable,tocon¢rmorto
transform the vision of the world, and, in this way, the action on the
world, therefore in the world.’’ It is ‘‘a quasi-magical power that
enables acquiring the equivalent of what is obtained by (physical or
economical)force.Thispowerisonlypossibleifitisrecognized,thatis
to say, unrecognized as arbitrary.’’49 In this perspective, religion
appears as an essentiallysymbolic activity, as a symbolic form, thatis
to say, like a body of practices and representations (rites and beliefs)
whose e⁄cacy is not of a material order (like a physical force, for
instance).The symbolic encompasseslanguagebutitincludesalarger
set of human actions. The symbolic de¢nes also the connotative
function of signs, linguistic or otherwise. The power of symbol rests
upon what it does not explicitly say, upon what it supposes without
openly explaining it. It leads to a relation of meaning that is socially
founded, signifying that symbolic power is not created outside of the
opposing stances that are characteristic of the social structure in its
entirety. If symbol has its own e⁄ciency, this e⁄ciency is nonetheless
linked to the genesis of the structure of social space. More precisely,
concerning the symbolic power of language, symbolic power necessi-
tates‘‘thebelief inthelegitimacyofwords and inthe onewho repeats
them,abeliefthatisnottheresponsibilityofthewordstoproduce.’’50
Inotherterms,symbolicpowerisnotselfsu⁄cient,itsfoundationlies
in the general rapports of domination of which it can appear as a
‘‘sublimation.’’

--- Page 16 ---
544
Between e⁄ciency itself and ideological dependency, between sui
generis order and superstructure, the religious act is neither idealized
norasimplere£ection(moreorlessdeformed)ofsocialstructure.The
secretofthisdependence/independenceofreligioussymbolicpoweris
tobefoundintheintermediarystructurethatconstitutesthecenterof
Bourdieu’s sociology of religion: religious ¢eld.The notion of habitus
completes the preceding in the sense that it associates with a speci¢c
¢eld a type of speci¢c interest that is irreducible to the interests of
other ¢elds ^ in particular, economic ones. ‘‘In order for a ¢eld to
function, there must be stakes and people ready to play the game
[people who are] endowed with the habitus implying knowledge and
recognition ofthe immanentlawsofthegame, ofthe stakes,etc.’’51A
speci¢callyreligiousinterestisthusassociatedwithreligious¢eld.
Religious ¢eld provides a very singular example of the ‘‘governed
liberty’’characteristicofsecondarystructuresinmechanismsofdomi-
nation(inwhichtheeconomicalandpoliticalseemtooccupyacentral
position, at least in industrialized societies). For Bourdieu, religious
¢eld must not be conceived of as an immutable reality: a structural
genesis exists for it in relation to transformations of social structure,
and, according to him, the dissolution of what is religious becomes
visible in societies moving towards secularization.While any religious
institution tends to be presented as an ahistorical reality, identical to
itself in any given time or place, necessary historical analysis reveals
theprocessesbehindtheconstitutionofbeliefs,rites,andinstitutions.
It can then be asked why the sociology of religion is of such limited
quantitativescopeinBourdieu’scorpus,sinceitgaveBourdieualarge
part of his conceptual architecture and since he, more than anyone,
was aware of its origins taken from theheartof Durkheim’s,Weber’s,
and,notnegligibly,Marx’ssociologicalthought.
Thisgap stemsfromafundamentaluncertaintyaboutthepossibilities
of sociological study of religion. For Bourdieu, religion is in fact an
object that is, sociologically speaking, nearly impossible. During the
1982annualcolloquiumoftheAssociationFranc(cid:2)aisedeSociologiede
Religions, he questions the scienti¢c validity of the sociology of
religionwhen itis practiced by‘‘producers who participate tovarying
degrees in the religious ¢eld.’’52 All sociologists of religion are con-
frontedbythefollowingquasi-unsolvablecontradiction:‘‘Whenoneis
one of them,’’ he states,‘‘one participates in the inherent belief in the
belonging to a ¢eld whatever that ¢eld may be (religious, academic,

--- Page 17 ---
545
etc.), and, when one is not one of them, one risks ¢rst forgetting to
inscribebeliefintothemodel...,and,second,beingdeprivedofuseful
information.’’53The¢rstbarrier(i.e.,belonginginonewayoranother
toareligiousinstitution),canleadtoadoptingareligiouspointofview
on religion, topracticing areligious sociology ratherthan a sociology
of religion. To avoid this (which is ‘‘di⁄cult’’ but not ‘‘impossible’’
according to Bourdieu), it is necessary to practice ‘‘an objecti¢cation
without complaisance ... of all links, of all forms of participation, of
subjective or objective belonging, even the most tenuous.’’54 The
second barrier (not being one of them) is not scienti¢cally any less
dangerous.Thevictimherefallsintothepositivisttrapbyapproaching
religion from an exclusively external point of view, ‘‘like a thing,’’
withoutseeing the subjectiveforces ofreligious activity, and inpartic-
ulartheunconditionaladhesiontorevealedtruths.
A certain a⁄nity exists therefore between this second posture and
‘‘Republican’’ social sciences. It has already been underlined that
Catholicism was for many centuries a state religion in France, with a
strongpresenceintheschoolsystem,particularlyin highereducation.
One of the most important projects of the republican regime of the
1880swaspreciselytodisengageFrenchsocietyoftheCatholicinstitu-
tion’s hold.55 In the educational domain, theThird Republic inaugu-
rated obligatory primary education, free and secular, completely in-
dependent of any religious institution.56 The end of the nineteenth
century was thus a violent period of anti-clericalism, one that led to
the1905lawseparatingchurchandstate.TheCatholicChurchlostits
statusofo⁄cialreligionatthattime.
It is in this anti-clerical context that French sociology is born. It
constituted itself largely in opposition to the intellectual hold of
religion, and singularly against Catholic in£uence in the university at
the turn of the twentieth century. In one sense, being a sociologist
necessarily meant notbeing Catholic, notbeing ‘‘oneofthem’’ (which
mightseem surprisinginNorthAmericawherethestatusofinsider is
frequently valued for guaranteeing access to trustworthy information
ratherthanasahindranceforscience).Bourdieuwasnotexemptfrom
this form of anti-clericalism. In the conclusion to the conference on
‘‘the new clergy,’’ this unambiguous declaration appears: ‘‘The ques-
tion ofthe‘‘newclergy’’wouldperhapsnothavemissed itstargethad
it been able to lead to the founding of a new anti-clericalism.’’57 This
conclusive sentence was dropped from the second version of Choses
dites. This penance assuredly speaks to a certain malaise, one that
BourdieutriestoexplaininaninterviewwithJacquesMa|“tre:

--- Page 18 ---
546
IhadtorediscoverinmyownmindallthemutilationsthatIhadinherited
fromtheseculartraditionandreinforcedbytheimplicitpresuppositionsof
my science.There are subjects that one does not tackle, or only with the
greatestprudence.Therearewaysofapproachingcertainsubjectsthatarea
littledangerousand,¢nally,oneacceptsthemutilationsthatsciencehadto
accept in order to constitute itself. One feels obliged ^ by an implicit
adhesion that is linked to entry into the profession ^ to put between
parentheses all thatcomes from the orderoftraditionalobjects ofreligion
andmetaphysics.Thereisakindofrepressionthatistacitlyrequiredofthe
professional.58
Nonetheless,thispittanceofsympathydoesnotcompletelyexplainthe
gapbetweentherecognizedtheoreticalimportanceofreligionandthe
small amount of research and publications in the area. After all,
Bourdieu dedicated aworkto criticizing male domination, another to
denouncing the power of television.To religion’s case must be added
Bourdieu’s conviction that religion is a declining institution in di¡er-
entiated societies. In other words, Bourdieu manifested noinclination
forreligiousactivity(whilehistasteforartandliterature,andofcourse
pedagogy, is well known), but this distance was doubled by the idea
that religion no longer has the social hold that it had at the time of
Weber or Durkheim, who had made it a central object of their
sociology.Bourdieuthereforehadnonegativeinterestinreligion(while
he takes on the media or the‘‘Nobilityof State,’’whose power is seen
ascontemporary).
Thus, this double orientation probably led Bourdieu to reduce the
socialroleofinstitutedreligionswhilesingularlyfocusinghisattention
on the Catholic Church. In the studies on the Kabyles, Islam is
completely absent, as if a strict division exists between agrarian
societies without a religious institution and di¡erentiated societies in
which religion would be entirely monopolized by the Church before
disappearing at the same time as it. But, if the Catholic Church no
longerhastheeconomicorpoliticalpowerithad,doesthatmeanthat
religiousbeliefsandpracticeshavedisappearedfrommodernsocieties?
Littleislessclear.First,whilefocusingonCatholicism,andinparticu-
lar on French Catholicism, which was the state religion until the
twentieth century, Bourdieu assuredly minimized the importance of
the question of religious pluralism that cannot be ignored in North
America.What is more, a de¢nition of ‘‘religion’’ centered on ‘‘reli-
gious¢eld’’(thatis,onthebattlesbetweenspecialistsintheirrelation-
shipswithglobalsocialstructure) onlysomewhat allows for the study
of religious phenomena that take place beyond the power of clerics,
evenwhen these are the‘‘new clerics.’’ This errorofperspective might

--- Page 19 ---
547
havebeenavoidedbyleavingmoreroomforthereligiousactoutsideof
the institution, including in di¡erentiated societies. By turning our
attention to the individual ‘‘bricolage’’ of beliefs, to the network
organization of amateurs of esotericism, to the non-bureaucratic
organization of certain Pentecostalisms, to the original power struc-
turefoundinSanteria,forinstance,oneavoidstheimpassecreatedby
simplyreportingtheCatholicChurch’slossofsocialpower.
Notes
1. Translated from‘‘Pierre Bourdieu et la religion: synthe'se critique d’une synthe'se
critique,’’which¢rstappearedinArchivesdeSciencesSocialesdesReligions2002,
118(April-June):5^19.Theworkhasbeenrevisedandmodi¢edbytheauthorfor
the American edition. [Translator’s note: I have tried, when possible, to use
previoustranslationsofBourdieu’sworksbyRichardNiceandothers.Theseworks
arelistedassuchhere.Allothertranslationsaremyown.]
2. Pierre Bourdieu, In Other Words, translated by Matthew Adamson (Stanford:
StanfordUniversityPress),22.
3. Ibid.,49.
4. In 1962, Bourdieu already used the concept of habitus in the study of peasant
celibacy in Bearn, but this concept, at this stage of his career, was de¢ned,
following Marcel Mauss, as a setofbody techniques. (Ithank Gise'le Sapiro for
thisusefulremark.)Seetherecentre-editionofthestudy:PierreBourdieu,Lebal
desce¤libataires^Crisedelasocie¤te¤ paysanneenBe¤arn(Paris:Seuil,2002).
5. Pierre Bourdieu,‘‘Postface’’ to Erwin Panofsky, Architecture gothique et pense¤e
scolastique(Paris:EditionsdeMinuit,1967),161.
6. Bourdieu,‘‘Postface’’toArchitecturegothiqueetpense¤escholastique,162.
7. PierreBourdieu,‘‘Pratiquerituelleetdiscours,’’BulletinduCentreThomasMore21
(1978):3^10.
8. David Swartz,‘‘Bridging the Study of Culture and Religion: Pierre Bourdieu’s
PoliticalEconomyofSymbolicPower,’’SociologyofReligion57(1996):71^85.In
a forthcoming article (‘‘Spiritual Capital: Theorizing Religion with Bourdieu
againstBourdieu’’),BradfordVerteradoptsaratherdi¡erentpointofviewonthe
sociology of religion in Bourdieu from the view of Swartz and from my own.
According to Verter, Bourdieu’s sociology of religion is somewhat cursory and
‘‘Voltairian’’; itis within his culturalsociology, morehighlydeveloped and com-
plex, that one can ¢nd the necessary tools for forging new concepts useful in
studyingreligions ^ forexample,theideaof‘‘spiritualcapital’’thatVerterde¢nes
veryprecisely.Suchanapproachseemsparticularlyinnovative.
9. Pierre Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice, translated by Richard Nice (Stanford:
StanfordUniversityPress,1990).
10. Pierre Bourdieu,‘‘Gene'se et structure du champ religieux,’’ Revue Franc(cid:1)aise de
sociologieXII/2(1971),295^334.
11. SeePierreBourdieuandMoniquedeSaint-Martin,‘‘LaSainteFamille:l’e¤piscopat
franc(cid:2)aisdanslechampdupouvoir,’’ActesdelaRechercheenSciencesSociales44^
45(1982):1^53.Concerningthe‘‘dissolution’’ofthereligious,referto‘‘Lechamp
religieuxdanslechampdemanipulationsymbolique,’’inCollectif,Lesnouveaux

--- Page 20 ---
548
clercs ^ Pre“tres, pasteurs et spe¤cialistes des relations humaines et de la sante¤
(Gene've:LaboretFides,1985), 255^261 ^ thiswas reprintedpartiallyunder the
title‘‘Ladissolutiondureligieux’’inChosesdites(Paris:EditionsdeMinuit,1987),
117^123.
12. Bourdieu,‘‘Gene'seetstructureduchampreligieux,’’295.
13. Ibid.,297.
14. PierreBourdieu,‘‘Uneinterpre¤tationdelathe¤oriedelareligionselonMaxWeber,’’
Archiveseurope¤ennesdesociologie12(1971):1.
15. Ibid.,6.
16. Bourdieu,‘‘Gene'seetstructureduchampreligieux,’’300.
17. PierreBourdieu,TheLogicofPractice,223.
18. ClaudeLe¤vi-Strauss,LaPense¤esauvage(Paris:PressesUniversitaires deFrance,
1962).
19. Bourdieu,TheLogicofPractice,223.
20. Ibid.,234.
21. Ibid.,240.
22. MarcelMaussandHenriHubert,‘‘Esquissed’unethe¤oriege¤ne¤raledelamagie,’’in
Sociologieetanthropologie(Paris:PressesUniversitairesdeFrance,1985),119.
23. Ibid.,‘‘Esquissed’unethe¤oriege¤ne¤raledelamagie,’’135.
24. Bourdieu,TheLogicofPractice,240.
25. Seenote7,‘‘Orders,ClassesandReligions,’’inMaxWeber,‘‘Lestypesdecommu-
nalisationreligieuse(sociologiedelareligion),’’inEconomieetsocie¤te¤ (Paris:Plon,
1971).
26. Bourdieu,‘‘Gene'seetstructureduchampreligieux,’’303.
27. Ibid.,304^306.
28. Pierre Bourdieu and Monique de Saint Martin,‘‘La Sainte Famille : l’e¤piscopat
franc(cid:2)aisdanslechampdupouvoir.’’
29. Bourdieu,‘‘Gene'seetstructureduchampreligieux,’’311^312.
30. PierreBourdieu,Ladominationmasculine(Paris:Seuil,1998),92^93.
31. PierreBourdieu,Alge¤rie60(Paris:EditionsdeMinuit,1977),90^91.
32. Bourdieu,‘‘Gene'seetstructureduchampreligieux,’’319.
33. BourdieuandSaintMartin,‘‘LaSainteFamille:l’e¤piscopatfranc(cid:2)aisdanslechamp
dupouvoir,’’4^5.
34. Ibid.,16.
35. Ibid.,222.
36. Ibid.,28.
37. Ibid.,31.
38. Ibid.,34.
39. Ibid.,35.
40. Ibid.,46.
41. Pierre Bourdieu,‘‘Le rire des e¤ve“ques,’’ in Raisons Pratiques ^ Surlathe¤oriede
l’action(Paris:Seuil,1994),204.
42. Ibid.,51.
43. PierreBourdieu,Chosesdites(Paris:EditionsdeMinuit,1987),120.[Translator’s
note:Thechaptercalled‘‘Ladissolutiondureligieux’’isnotincludedintheEnglish
translation of Choses dites (In OtherWords) quoted earlier on.This is thus my
translation,asareallreferencescitedasChosesdites.]
44. PierreBourdieuandJacquesMa|“tre,‘‘Avant-proposdialogue¤,’’inJacquesMa|“tre,
L’autobiographied’unparano|«aque^L’abbe¤ Berry(1878^1947)etleromandeBilly,
Intro|«bo(Paris:Anthropos,1994),XVI.

--- Page 21 ---
549
45. PierreBourdieu,Chosesdites,121.
46. Ibid.,123.
47. PierreBourdieu,‘‘Pie¤te¤ religieuseetde¤votionartistique,’’ActesdelaRechercheen
SciencesSociales,105(December1994):73.
48. PierreBourdieu,‘‘Propossurl’e¤conomiedel’e¤glise,’’inRaisonsPratiques^Surla
the¤oriedel’action(Paris,Seuil,1994),216.
49. PierreBourdieu,‘‘Surlepouvoirsymbolique,’’AnnalesESC,XXXII/3(1977):410.
50. Ibid.,411.
51. Pierre Bourdieu, ‘‘Haute culture et haute couture,’’ in Questions de sociologie
(Paris:EditiondeMinuit,1984),114.
52. PierreBourdieu,‘‘Sociologuesdelacroyanceetcroyancesdesociologies,’’Archives
deSciencesSocialesdesReligions63/1(1987):156.
53. Ibid.,156.
54. Ibid.,160.
55. Rene¤ Re¤mond, L’Anticle¤ricalisme en France de 1815 a' nos jours (Paris: Fayard,
1976),75.
56. Republican power did not, however, suppress Catholic primary, secondary, and
higher education when it was private, and it continued to exist in parallel with
publiceducation.Inotherwords,theobligatorynatureofprimaryeducationdid
notnecessarilyimplysecularschooling since children could beplaced in private
institutions. The coexistence of the two concurrent educational systems set the
stage for numerous political confrontations all during the twentieth century as
measures favoring either private or public education came before the National
Assembly. Massive protestswere organized in all the major cities forone or the
other ‘‘camps.’’ This structural confrontation has been called the ‘‘War of Two
Frances,’’ Catholic and secular France, an opposition that only partially corre-
spondstothepoliticaldichotomyof‘‘right/left.’’
57. PierreBourdieu,‘‘Lechampreligieuxdanslechampdemanipulationsymbolique,’’
in Collectif, Les nouveaux clercs ^ Pre“tres, pasteurs et spe¤cialistes des relations
humainesetdelasante¤ (Gene've:LaboretFides,1985),261.
58. PierreBourdieuandJacquesMa|“tre,‘‘Avant-proposdialogue¤,’’XV.