--- Page 1 ---
Buddhism in Chinese Society: An Economic History from the
Fifth to the Tenth Centuries (review)
Grant Hardy
China Review International, Volume 7, Number 1, Spring 2000, pp. 85-90
(Review)
Published by University of Hawai'i Press
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1353/cri.2000.0023
For additional information about this article
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/8601
Access provided by your subscribing institution. (22 Dec 2018 03:32 GMT)

--- Page 2 ---
Reviews 85
Jacques Gernet. Buddhism in Chinese Society: An Economic History from
the Fifth to the Tenth Centuries. Translated by Franciscus Verellen. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1995. xvii, 441 pp. Hardcover $42.50,
isbn 0–231–07380–1. Paperback $18.50, isbn 0–231–11411–7.
Les aspects économiques du bouddhisme dans la société chinoise du Ve au Xe siècle
was first published in Saigon in 1956. Since then it has been reprinted several
times, and indeed it helped shape the field of medieval Chinese studies. Its
author, Jacques Gernet, has gone on to a long and world-renowned career as a
historian of China. In 1995, Columbia University Press reissued this work in an
English translation by Franciscus Verellen (with only slightly updated notes and a
supplemental bibliography). There is no doubt that in the 1950s this book was of
© 2000 by University ground-breaking and seminal importance. The question, however, is whether this
of Hawai‘i Press study, or perhaps any work of historical scholarship, is worth republishing some
forty years later.

--- Page 3 ---
86 China Review International: Vol. 7, No. 1, Spring 2000
The happy answer in this case is yes. First of all, language study occupies a
great deal of time for serious students of Chinese history, and in the scramble to
learn Modern Chinese, Classical Chinese, and Japanese, crucial European lan-
guages such as French and German often get short shrift. While the essentials of
Gernet’s study can be grasped with only a cursory knowledge of French, this new
translation will encourage American students to grapple with his arguments and
examples in close detail.
Second, despite advances in our knowledge of Tang-dynasty China, most of
Gernet’s work is still valid. This is because it takes the form of translating and in-
terpreting specific documents, particularly those found at Dunhuang. To the “of-
ficial” history of Buddhism derived from decrees, memorials, scriptures, standard
histories, and inscriptions, Gernet adds population registers at various monaster-
ies, itemized bills for construction projects and feasts, ordination certificates, wills,
deeds, contracts, auction receipts, loan certificates, lists of revenues and expendi-
tures, price lists, banquet calendars, catalogs of assets, annual reports, records of
offerings, bylaws of Buddhist associations, dinner invitations, and so forth. To a
large extent, Gernet bases his analysis and arguments directly on the primary
sources that are still at the heart of our understanding of this period of history.
And third, this translation of Gernet’s book is timely in that it forces our at-
tention back to the mundane details of Buddhism. It is still the case that many of
our students encounter Buddhism in a quick survey course, or in idealized popu-
lar accounts that focus on the “great tradition” of doctrine, famous monks, and
imperial sponsorship, and this is still a problem. Buddhism was part of the lives
of millions in China, many of whom would have known little of elite practices
and opinions. To see the tradition as a whole, it is necessary to take into account
powerful, wealthy monasteries that owned animals and slaves, that regulated the
lives of serfs and rented out land, that spent enormous sums on construction, art,
fabrics, and eventually appropriated vast tracts of farmland. Monasteries owned
and maintained (but did not operate) mills and presses, and, at least at Dun-
huang, it appears that they provided nearly the entire supply of flour and oil to
the region. They served as inns, shops, and pawnbrokers, and they loaned out
both cash and grain (at rates ranging from zero to 50 percent interest). They also
cared for the sick, provided medicines, distributed food to the poor, and wel-
comed visitors. Individual monks made loans, bought property, and worried
about who would inherit their possessions. Monks also interacted with laypersons
when they accepted offerings, performed services for the dead, practiced medicine
and divination, and attended festivals and the popular torch-lit public vegetarian
© 2000 by University feasts. Laypersons were no doubt also impressed by monks who performed magic,
of Hawai‘i Press miracles, exorcisms, and self-mutilations.
One of the most exciting developments in Buddhist pedagogy in recent years
is Donald Lopez’ Buddhism in Practice, a book that takes students past the regu-

--- Page 4 ---
Reviews 87
larly anthologized great tradition excerpts and into the sometimes strange, usually
convoluted world of Buddhism as it was actually lived. This new translation of
Gernet’s classic study is a welcome addition to that genre. Gernet is at his best
when he describes the sights and sounds of Buddhist festivals, or when he lists oc-
cupations associated with the new religion:
The needs of the faithful and their places of worship prompted the appearance
of crafts and commerce for the supply of devotional objects in the vicinity of
the monasteries. In villages and townships, shops opened where sacred texts
were copied and statuettes cast, and which occasionally appear to have been
taverns as well. The construction and decoration of buildings, the ornamenta-
tion of the streets at festival times, the maintenance of the mills and presses on
the monastic estates required the services of craftsmen, technicians, and artists.
A considerable number of trades are named in the manuscripts from Tun-
huang: nail casters, tin-smiths, pot makers, furnace makers, cauldron
repairmen, sculptors, lock smiths, glassworkers, roughcasters, hemp washers,
felters, etc. (p. 167)
The profusion of names, terms, and numbers cited by Gernet is breathtaking, and
he offers a portrayal of Buddhism as it was lived in medieval China that has not
been matched in forty years.
Professor Gernet (or perhaps his editors at Columbia) wisely decided to give
his book a more generic title in English. His research was based on economic
data, but he ventures far into sociology—with his account of lay Buddhist asso-
ciations and his observations about the social mixing that was part of Buddhist
festivals; into religious history—with his careful investigations into the Indian
roots of Chinese practices and the elaborate justifications made for monks engag-
ing in economic ventures; and into psychology—as when he attempts to under-
stand why people would bankrupt themselves to give lavishly or when he points
out that in dealing with the sangha, the notion of remuneration was never fully
disentangled from that of pious donation.
Buddhism in Chinese Society is far-ranging and brilliant. Having established
that, it is my duty as a reviewer to point out a few weaknesses, some of which are
endemic to the genre of Annales-style economic history and others of which are
more particular. To begin with the first, the strength of this type of history is that
it takes us deep into the lives of common, ordinary people. Thanks to Gernet’s
documents, lists, and descriptions, we can imagine what life might have been like
for a monastery serf, or an unordained novice, or a lay believer. Read, for
example, the following contract:
This twelfth day of the second month of the year I-yu (presumably 865 or 925),
© 2000 by University
the monk Pao-hsing of the Ch’ien-yüan monastery, requiring the help of a
of Hawai‘i Press
young man, engages the commoner (po-hsing) Teng Wu-tzu for a period of
eight months [i.e., for the period of agricultural labor, from March to October].
He has settled the monthly hire at one load of millet and wheat. He has three

--- Page 5 ---
88 China Review International: Vol. 7, No. 1, Spring 2000
mu of wheat fields . . . and four mu of millet fields. . . . For summer garments,
Teng Wu-tzu shall [be provided with] a long-sleeved robe, a suit, and a pair of
leather shoes. From the moment the engagement takes effect, Teng Wu-tzu
must appear at work every day of each month; he will not be allowed to shirk
his duty. If he is idle during one day in a busy month, he shall be charged [a re-
duction of his hire of] five tou; if it is not a busy month, he shall be charged one
tou [per day of idleness]. If he dallies on the way or if he naps in the fields . . .
[etc.] he shall have to make amends. In case of illness, he shall be permitted to
return to the village for five days; but in excess of that period, the amount [of
the penalty for idleness] shall be calculated in accordance with the [above-
mentioned] rule. (pp. 132–133)
Or this excerpt from a Dunhuang donation list:
Five haircuts offered for the construction by an anonymous believer, for the
benefit of her younger brother having departed on a western journey. She hopes
that nothing untoward will happen to him and that he may soon be able to
return.
Five fans, one shih of wheat, and one shih of millet offered by Chang I-tzu
for the construction, so that his deceased mother may be reborn in the Pure
Land, and for the benefit of his father, suffering from eye disease. (pp. 203–204)
The disadvantage of this approach is that there is no structuring narrative or
chronological progression. Gernet has arranged his material by theme, and he as-
sumes that readers already have a fundamental grasp of the history of Buddhism
in China. Gernet could have been more helpful in guiding his readers through
this rich bounty of detail; because he stays close to his sources (not necessarily a
fault), his conclusions and observations are often buried in the text. For instance,
he begins with the obvious question of just how many monks and nuns there
were in China, and his answer soon becomes bogged down in discussions of the
distinctions between great monasteries, village chapels, and mountain hermitages,
differentiated by size, holdings, status, legal privileges, and sponsorship (by the
state, great families, or commoners), as well as investigations into fraudulent reg-
istrations of religiously committed itinerant monks and legal registrations of non-
religious laypersons who bought ordination certificates to escape corvée labor or
taxes. These are crucial considerations, but Gernet does not take pains to make
his final, judicious conclusions obvious (and in the next chapter he raises yet
more issues such as forged ordination certificates and irregular monks engaged in
lay activities).
Gernet’s great strength is his attention to detail, and when he offers
generalizations, he sometimes stumbles. For example, on page 92, he notes that
“virtually all of [the monks] devoted themselves to activities of a profane nature,
© 2000 by University
and principally to the practice of usury,” while later he observes that “not all of
of Hawai‘i Press
the Buddhist clergy practiced usury, only the wealthiest among them and those
who occupied important positions within the monastic hierarchy. . . . [T]he num-

--- Page 6 ---
Reviews 89
ber of monks with sufficient means to grant loans at interest was rather small”
(pp. 181–182).
Eyebrows may rise at the remark “there is no difference in nature or meaning
between the mutilations and suicides, on the one hand, and the sacrifice of
patrimonies, on the other” (p. 245), and in a study that celebrates diversity and
complexity it is somewhat jarring to run into phrases like “the Chinese mentality”
(p. 66) and “the Buddhist faith expresses itself most authentically in. . .” (p. 235).
Gernet concludes a description of a particularly tightly knit Buddhist association
with the words “It is clear that an engagement of such totality was dangerous and
that its effects exceeded to a remarkable extent the mutual obligations of fellow-
ship in modern societies,” but it is not clear to me where the danger in the first
part lies (to the mental or physical well-being of individuals? to the state? to the
religion?), and I am not at all persuaded of the accuracy of the second half of the
assertion.
There are a few lapses of explanation—I wish that he had examined the
Vinaya’s proscriptions of monks using spiritual powers for personal benefit, and
his final four-page chapter on why Buddhism declined after the repression of 845
is simply inadequate—but the most important criticism is that economic analysis
has a hard time explaining faith. I was left with a marvelous sense of what people
did, but not how their beliefs were integrated with their actions (the one notable
exception is Gernet’s analysis of the Inexhaustible Treasuries in the Sect of the
Three Stages). Only from a narrow point of view could one say that “one of the
surest economic effects of the great Buddhist constructions was, frequently, an
appalling misery for the peasant class” (p. 14) or describe Buddhist establishments
as having “a parasitical economy that nevertheless had its place in this country of
agricultural civilization” (p. 178). Surely Buddhism offered some benefits, perhaps
not all economic, to commoners (and even from an economic perspective, Gernet
shows how Buddhism transformed commerce and investment in China). When
Gernet ascribes actions to the “collective delirium in the faithful” (p. 239), he
clearly has reached the limits of his analytical resources.
It is refreshing to read a monograph on Buddhism that eagerly investigates
the non-spiritual side of things, but perhaps Gernet restricts his focus too much.
An ideal history would combine economic analysis with a careful examination of
doctrine and belief (a promising methodology can be found in chapter 8 of
Rodney Stark’s The Rise of Christianity, which investigates sacrifice and rational
choice theory) as well as political history. A kind of balance might be found by
combining Buddhism in Chinese Society with Kenneth Ch’en’s Buddhism in China:
© 2000 by University A Historical Survey (a volume that was inexplicably omitted from Gernet’s
of Hawai‘i Press supplemental bibliography), but Ch’en’s work is now over thirty years old and
nearly all its attention is given over to elite Buddhism. Though Gernet’s book is

--- Page 7 ---
90 China Review International: Vol. 7, No. 1, Spring 2000
still invaluable, it is time for a new, comprehensive, classroom-friendly survey of
Chinese Buddhism.
A final criticism is directed at the publisher. The French edition included ten
pages of photographic plates illustrating various types of documents used by
Gernet. While they are not, strictly speaking, essential to his non-Chinese-literate
readers, their omission is nevertheless a substantial loss. A study of material Bud-
dhism deserves to be accompanied by reproductions of material artifacts. In the
spirit of Gernet’s general approach, they focus our minds on the concrete.
Readers of this review should recognize that these complaints are quibbles.
Jacques Gernet’s Buddhism in Chinese Society is a masterful, brilliant study. In 714,
the Imperial Secretariat Yao Ch’ung argued in a memorial to the emperor that
“Buddhism . . . is not [a religion of the] exterior; it may be apprehended only
through the mind” (p. 51). Gernet’s account demonstrates just how wrong he was,
and Columbia University Press is to be commended for making this excellent
work more widely accessible.
Grant Hardy
Grant Hardy is an assistant professor of history at the University of North Carolina
at Asheville specializing in early China and historiography.