--- Page 1 ---
HEINZ BECHERT
BUDDHA-FIELD AND TRANSFER OF MERIT IN A
THERAV,~DA SOURCE
Though Sri Lanka has been considered the homeland of the most orthodox
and conservative form of Buddhism and has played an important part in the
preservation and spread of Theravfida throughout history, Buddhism in
Ceylon was not exempt from the general trend towards innovation, and
there were periods when orthodoxy had a rather difficult time with the
dynamics of Mahfiy~na and Tantric forms of Buddhism. Both from the
chronicles and from a considerable number of architectural and inscrip-
tional remains we can imagine the impact of Mahfiyfina on the mediaeval
culture of Ceylon. 1 Influences from Mah~yfina were also absorbed in the
popular religion of the Sinhalese. 2
In P~tli literature, Mah~y~ma is called Vetullavfida. 3 In the historical
literature of Ceylon, the earliest reference to Vetullavfida is found in the
Mahdvamsa. There it is said about King Vohfirikatissa (215--237 A.D.)
that, "suppressing the Vetulla doctrine and keeping heretics in check by
his minister Kapila, he made the true doctrine to shine forth in glory"
(Mahdva.msa 36.41). Since there is no information on the type of this
Vetulla heresy in the commentary of the Mahdvamsa (Vamsatthappakdsinf,
ed. G. P. Malalasekera, p. 662), we depend for additional information on
much later sources which seem to be of a rather suspicious nature. Thus we
must confess that we do not have any reliable historical information on the
exact nature of the Vetulla doctrines suppressed by this king, nor do we
know how much earlier, from which part of India and by whom these
doctrines were brought to the island, and which communities in Ceylon
were subscribers to Vetulla, or Mahfiyfina doctrines. More than 60 years
later, King Got.hfibhaya again suppressed the Vetullavfida. In the passage
recording this event (Mahdvam.s a 36.111 f.) we also find the first explicit
statement that the monks who had turned to the Vetulla doctrine belonged
to the Abhayagiriv~sins. This nikfiya, or sect, which is also named the
Dhammaruci (Dharmaruci) sect, had originated as a result of the first split
of the Buddhist Sangha of Ceylon during the period of King Vattagfirnani
Abhaya (lst century B.C.).
It is widely believed "that the use of Sanskrit rather than P~li by the
monks of the Abhayagiri fixed yet another distinction between them and
their rivals of the Mahfivihfira", and this is reproduced even in some rather
lndo-Iranian Journal 35: 95--108, 1992.
(cid:14)9 1992 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

--- Page 2 ---
96 HEINZ BECHERT
recent publications on the subject.4 However, we have ample evidence for
the fact that the Abhayagirivfisins used the same collection of sacred
scriptures in Pfdi which has been handed down to us by the orthodox
Theravfida tradition of the Mahftvihfiravfisins and which formed the com-
mon heritage of all of the three nikfiyas, or sects of Buddhism, in mediaeval
Ceylon.
Another wide-spread misunderstanding is the belief that the monks of
the Abhayagiriv~sa and the Jetavanavfisa sects were mostly followers of
Mahfiyfina, whereas the monks of the Mahfivihfira sect are believed to have
based their interpretation of the doctrine on the Theravfida tradition as
introduced from India exclusively, without being much influenced by the
further development of doctrine and literature in India. It has been long
known, however, that late canonical and post-canonical Pfili literature was
heavily influenced by Indian Buddhist literature and philosophy of other
schools. 5 On the other hand, the available evidence clearly gives proof that,
though Mahfiyfinist tendencies were at times tolerated in the Abhayagiri and
Jetavana communities, Mah~yS_na was never made the official creed of these
two nikfiyas.
There is, unfortunately, still much confusion about the nature of Buddhist
"sects" (nik~ya) or "schools" (vfida) in spite of the enormous amount of
writing that has been done on Buddhist sects. This confusion is caused by
confounding different types of sect. We should differentiate three main
types of sect: the so-called vinaya sects, the doctrinal sects, and the philo-
sophical schools. A "vinaya sect", or nikfiya is characterized as a community
of monks who mutually acknowledge the validity of their ordination and
make use of the same particular redaction of the vinaya texts, i.e. the texts
of Buddhist ecclesiastical law.
The second type of "sect" came into existence during the period of
doctrinal dissensions and controversies, when particular notions of the
issues under discussion were accepted in the different nikhyas, which had
only now turned into communities which were distinguished, not only as
different "vinaya sects", but also as upholders of certain doctrines. Only
very few of the sects mentioned in the context of the early doctrinal con-
troversies succeeded, however, in developing a consistent system of philoso-
phy which had an impact on the progress of philosophical thought in India.
These were the philosophical schools. There should be no confusion of
these philosophical schools with the earlier doctrinal and the early vinaya
sects. A Sarv~stivfidin, in the sense of a follower of the Sarvfistiv~da phi-
losophy, could well have been a member of a rather different vinaya sect,
particularly of a sect which had no philosophical tradition of its own.
The formation of Mahfiyfina Buddhism took place in a way which was