--- Page 1 ---
440
Between Spiritual Economy and Religious
Commodification: Negotiating Temple
Autonomy in Contemporary China
Kuei-min Chang*
Abstract
This research investigates the contentious use of temple assets amid wide-
spread local state-led religious commodification in contemporary China.
Based on a comparative analysis of 22 historic temples, this paper argues
thatgiventhechoice,templeleadersstriveforproperty-managementauton-
omy,whichtheynegotiateontwofronts.Externally,owingtotheimmobil-
ity of historic temple assets, temple leaders avoid antagonizing local state
agents by demonstrating political conformity and the temple’s economic
contribution.Internally,theyseektobuildadonation-basedmeriteconomy
to sustain the monastic institution. Since such autonomy must operate
withintheauthoritarianstate’sregulatoryframework,therestrainedcontest-
ation of the religious leadership actually helps to strengthen state control
over religion.
Keywords: religious commodification; temple revival; political economy of
religion; spiritual economy; religious autonomy; religious property; China
If there’s already a scenic park, the local government will build a temple inside the park;
ifthere’salreadyatemple,itwillbuildascenicparkaroundthetemple;andifthere’snothing,
thelocalgovernmentwillbuildatempleandthenascenicparkaroundit.1
Seniormonk,TempleDragon
Thetempleneededthismoneyatthebeginning.Nowwehaveaccumulatedsomeassetsandno
longerdependontheentrancefeeasamajorsourceofincome.Wediscussedthiswiththelocal
governmentandjusttwomonthsagowecancelledbothadmissions:10yuanforthetempleand
50yuanforthescenicpark.2
Abbot,TempleWest
Controlling religion has been a major task for the Chinese state.3 The Chinese
CommunistParty(CCP)hasdevotedmajorresourcestothisproject,asmanifested
bythe politicalco-optationofreligiousgroupsinitsunited-frontworkpolicyand
the campaigns to eradicate religion altogether during the Cultural Revolution.
The restoration of religion in the reformerahas usheredin a period of dramatic
* InstituteofSociology,AcademiaSinica,Taiwan.Email:changkueimin@gate.sinica.edu.tw.
1 Interviewwithreligiousleader,Yangzhou,June2013.
2 Interviewwithreligiousleader,Ningbo,July2012.
3 Yu2005;Brook2009;Madsen2010.
©SOASUniversityofLondon,2020 doi:10.1017/S030574101900122X Firstpublishedonline7February2020
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 2 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 441
religious revival but has also brought a variety of challenges to the Party’s
authority.4 Chinese Buddhism and Taoism have been hailed as model religions
and are routinely perceived to have a less contentious relationship with the
regime.5 The state’s favouritism towards these two religions can be seen in its
recent policy of religious “sinicization,” which demands that religions in China
incorporate Chinese characteristics into their beliefs and practices.6 This seem-
ingly amicable relationship, however, obscures a highly controversial dimension
of the interactions between the communist state and the Chinese Buddhist and
Taoist establishments: religious property and, particularly, the commodification
of temple assets by agents of the state.
Religiouscommodification,alsoknownas“religionbuildingastagetosingan
economic opera” (zongjiao datai jingji changxi 宗教搭台经济唱戏), has been a
popular local developmental strategy since the 1990s. It manifests in various
forms, including constructing temples and outdoor Buddha statues for tourism
purposes, leasing temples, publicly trading temple assets and impersonating
monks. According to the central authorities, these practices violate state regula-
tions, disturbnormal religiousactivities,profane religioussentimentand defame
Chinese religions. The commercial exploitation of temple assets has been the
defining challenge of the state’s management of Chinese Buddhism and
Taoism. In addition to a series of central prohibitions,7 the recently revised
Regulations on Religious Affairs (which came into effect in February 2018) –
the highest level of religious regulation in China – seek to ensure the religious
4 Potter2003;Madsen2010.
5 Yang2004;Laliberté2011;Ji2012;Koesel2014.
6 Forareviewofthepolicyofsinicizationandadiscussionofthe2018RegulationsonReligiousAffairs,
seeChang2018.
7 See,e.g.,“Guanyuzhizhilanjianlutianfoxiangdetongzhi”(Notificationregardingcurbingreckless
constructionofoutdoorBuddhastatues),13September1994,http://pkulaw.cn/CLI.4.18232;“Guanyu
zhizhiluanjianfodaojiaosiguandetongzhi”(Notificationregardingcurbingrecklessconstructionof
BuddhistandTaoisttemples),20October1994,http://pkulaw.cn/CLI.4.18235;“Guanyuzhizhiluanjian
miaoyuhelutianfoxiangdeyijian”(Opinionregardingcurbingrecklessconstructionoftemplesand
outdoorBuddhastatues),13December1996,http://pkulaw.cn/CLI.5.46266;“Guanyuchulishejifojiao
simiao, daojiao gongguan guanli youguan wenti de yijian” (Opinion regarding handling questions
relatedtothemanagementofBuddhistandTaoisttemples),8October2012,http://pkulaw.cn/CLI.4.
186780;“Guanyukaizhanzhengzhiweifaweiguisheligongdexiangdengjiejiaoliancaiwentizhuan-
xianggongzuodetongzhi”(Notificationregardinglaunchingthespecialtaskofrectifyingtheproblem
ofrakinginmoneyviareligiousmeans,suchasillegallysettingupmeritdonationboxes),1April2015,
http://www.chinabuddhism.com.cn/xw/jj/2015-04-03/8521.html; “Guanyu jinyibu zhili fojiao daojiao
shangyehuawentiderouganyijian”(Someopinionsregardingfurthergoverningtheproblemofcom-
mercialization in Buddhism and Taoism,” 23 November 2017, http://www.sara.gov.cn/xwfb/
xwjj20170905093618359691/575692.htm. All accessed 8 August 2018. Also “Guanyu jinyibu zhizhi
luanjiansimiaohelutianzongjiaozaoxiangdetongzhi”(Notificationregardingfurthercurbingreckless
constructionoftemplesandoutdoorreligiousstatues)in2011and“Guanyujinyibuzhizhihechuliluan-
jiandaxinglutianzongjiaozaoxiangdetongzhi”(Notificationregardingfurthercurbingandhandling
recklessconstructionoflargeoutdoorreligiousstatues)in2014.See“Shisinianfojiao,daojiaogongzuo
chengjiu huimou” (Review of 14 years of achievements in the work on Buddhism and Taoism).
Zhongguozongjiao2015(12),20–23.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 3 ---
442 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
use of temples by stipulating that a religious group has the right to access and
manage the state-owned and collective properties which it legally occupies.8
This paper investigates the contentious use of temple assets, an understudied
and yet focal point of the state–temple relationship in China. What drives local
state-led religious commodification? Amid the central state’s repeated failure to
reininitslocalagents,howdotempleleadersmaintainthereligioususeoftemple
assets? What impact does this contention have on state control over organized
Chinese Buddhism and Taoism?
Research Data
This paper covers the period from the 1979 publication of a People’s Daily edi-
torial calling for the implementation of a policy of religious freedom to the
endofXiJinping’s习近平firstterminofficein2017.9Thequalitativeandobser-
vational data come from interviews, official documents, regulations, research
papers, news archives and publications issued by the Chinese government as
well as by religious associations. The fieldwork was conducted between June
2012 and May 2015, during which time I investigated the property politics of
22 historic Chinese Buddhist and Taoist temples. These temples are predomin-
antly located in eastern and south-central China, which is home to almost
two-thirds of the 163 temples of national significance. I selected these temples
as they represent the variation in religious commodification. In most cases, I
haddirectaccesstothetemples’leadersandsitesnotopentothegeneralpublic.
Between April and July 2013, I worked as avolunteer-in-residence at one of the
templesinordertolearnhowafree-accesstempleoperates.Althoughtheymake
uponlyasmallportionofthefullspectrumoftemplesinChina,historictemples
are significant because they disproportionately affect the state’s religious policy.
Thus, a study focusing on this group of temples helps to shed light on the rela-
tionship between the state and temples in contemporary China.
Temple Commodification as an Institution
Atemplecanbethematerializationof,amongotherthings,alocalcommunity’s
desiretorebuildapreviouslyoppressedcollectiveidentity,theclericalactivismof
individualmonksandnunswhoaspiretohavetheirownlineagehomes,anover-
seas religious community’s search for ancestral roots for authenticity, or the
entrepreneurship of business men and women who seek to profit from religious
tourism.10 Scholarly attention paid to these diverse interests and the concerns
of a variety of social actors has enabled researchers of contemporary Chinese
8 “Zongjiao shiwu tiaoli” (Regulations on Religious Affairs), 7 September 2017, http://www.gov.cn/
zhengce/content/2017-09/07/content_5223282.htm.Accessed5December2018.
9 “Quanmianguanchezongjiaoxinyangziyouzhengce”(Fullyimplementthepolicyoffreedomofreli-
giousbelief).People’sDaily,17October1979.
10 Jing1999;Dean2003;Lai2003;Chan2005;ChanandLang2007;2011.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 4 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 443
religions and politics to situate temple reconstruction in the nexus of religious
revival, tourism and economic development. Previous literature has found that
temples often form a symbiotic relationship with the local government when
their interests converge, for instance for charities, public welfare projects and
tourism.11 Yet, this collaboration has also created potential conflicts as local
state interests rarely move beyond economic development. Religious leaders
run the risk of corroding their spiritual authority by being associated with such
economic interests.12 Furthermore, conflicts almost always arise when it comes
to the allocation of temple revenues, the use of temple property and the accessi-
bility of the temple.13 This research builds on the literature but focuses on the
state and monastic institutions whose distinctive logics inevitably foster conten-
tion over the use of temple property.
“Building a stage to sing opera” (datai changxi 搭台唱戏) as a phrase and a
strategy emerged from the rural development of the 1980s when local govern-
ments sought to mobilize surplus rural labour to support industrial production
by providing the capital and technical support for small township and village
enterprises.14 By the late 1980s, the strategy had extended to tourism. Religion,
owing to its still ambiguous status, entered into the frame under the rubric of
“culture building the stage to sing the economic opera.” This developmental
move was in response to the increased demands for temple reconstruction in
the reform era. According to the China Knowledge Resource Integrated
Database, the phrase “religion building the stage to sing the economic opera”
firstappearedin1993.15Thefirstofficialprohibitionofsuchapracticewasissued
in 1994.16 Despite being banned, the practice has, however, not ceased. To the
contrary,itspopularityamonglocalstateagentsintheformoflargeoutdoorreli-
giousstatueshasledtomultiplereferencesbeingmadein therecentRegulations
on Religious Affairs which forbid the commercial exploitation of religion.17
Popular temples have a proven track record in attracting tourists and capital
flow – a golden recipe for local GDP and fiscal revenues. In 2017, for example,
the famous Buddhist pilgrimage centre, Mount Putuo 普陀山, welcomed 8.58
million visitors, which amounted to an admission income of 878 million
yuan.18 The direct income from a temple and its spill-over effects, including
tourism consumption and the accompanying employment and taxation gains,
have driven growth-minded local governments to mine the temple economy.
11 Hillman2005;Chan2005;Chau2005.
12 Ji2011.
13 Birnbaum2003;Hillman2005;AshiwaandWank2006;Kang2009;Fisher2008;2011.
14 “Zan‘dataichangxi’”(Praise“buildingastagetosingopera”).People’sDaily,27April1984.
15 Li1993.
16 SeeFn.7.
17 Articles30,32,53and72.
18 “Sheizai‘zhuanying’Putuoshan:nianchaobayidemenpiaoqianbeisheishouzoule?”(Thosewhoare
monopolizing Mount Putuo: who acquired the yearly admission income of more than 800 million
yuan?). Xinhuanet, 16 April 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.com/finance/2018-04/16/c_129851045.htm.
Accessed6December2018.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 5 ---
444 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
Local leaders’ motivation to benefit materially from temples derives from the
cadre responsibility and evaluation system by which local cadres are evaluated
accordingtoawiderangeofspecificperformancecriteria,suchasindustrialout-
put,taxesandprofitsremitted,fiscalincome,retailsales,populationgrowthrate,
grainoutput,infrastructuralinvestmentrealized,andcompulsoryeducationcom-
pletionrate.19Thesecriteriaareassignedpoints,basedontheirdegreeofpriority,
and are divided into soft targets, hardtargets and vetotargets, which aretiedto
the promotion and annual bonuses of local leaders. Hard targets are almost
alwayslinkedtoeconomiccriteria.Vetotargets(yipiaofoujue一票否决)arepol-
itical in nature, and the failure to achieve them cancels out all other successful
achievements. This incentive structure is “high-powered” because strong perfor-
mances generate payoffs that account for a large portion of the cadre’s total
income.20 The leading cadres of a locality are evaluated by the next level up
Partyorgan,buttheirbonuspaymentisfinanced bythelocality’sowncollective
funds.Thepercentageofcadresevaluatedasexcellentislimited,pittinglocallea-
dersagainsteachother.Thesystemthereforeensuresstatecontroloverlocalstate
agentswhilemaintaininglocalinitiativesforeconomicdevelopment–aninstitu-
tional arrangement fundamental to China’s rapid economic growth.21
Performance-based promotion particularly affects leaders at the lower level of
government.22
Localleadersaredriventopursuehardtargetsoftenatthecostofotherincom-
patibletasks.Thisisfurtherexacerbatedbyfrequentcadrerotation.23According
to the Olsonian theory of “roving vs. stationary bandits,” short time horizons
incentivize the rational self-interested roving bandits to plunder and absolve
them from accounting for the long-term consequences of their decisions.24 This
problem of “moral hazard” is well captured in a study by Sarah Eaton and
GeniaKostkaofthelocalimplementationofenvironmentalpoliciesinthreepro-
vinces, Shanxi, Hunan and Shandong.25 Based on the data gathered on 898
municipal Party secretaries appointed between 1993 and 2011, it was found
that local leaders in China had surprisingly short tenures, averaging 3.8 years.
The study suggeststhat given the time pressure to perform in order to gain pro-
motion, local leadersoften select quickly visible and measurableprojectsdespite
the damage that these would do to efficient and sustainable growth.
TheconcentrationofpowerinthePartysecretaryandthepressuretoproduce
short-term economic growth more often than not override the protection duties
ofeachfunctionaldepartment.Forexample,inalettertothedirectorsoflower-
level departments concerned with protecting cultural relics, a provincial cultural
19 Whiting2004,105.
20 Ibid.
21 Xu2011.
22 Landry,LüandDuan2018.
23 Edin2003.
24 Olson1993.
25 EatonandKostka2014,362.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 6 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 445
bureau chief advised his subordinates not to openly confront the law-breaking
and profit-seeking local leaders since this would only result in a meaningless
sacrifice:
[Our]economy isgrowingrapidly;frontrunnersnaturallyget toreapthe greatestbenefits …
Some local governments inevitably resort to ideas and measures in order to bring about
quickreturns…Butintheworkofculturalrelics,how[dowe]stopthelaw-breakingbehaviour
ofindividualleaders?Thisisamatterofartandskills.First,[you]shouldreport[theviolation]
in writing on behalf of [our] department to the said leaders as well as the next higher level
department … Keep the documents of both issuing and receiving ends on file … to clarify
responsibilities. Second, … do not talk about big principles to the leaders and to the related
departments at various levels. Talk sense about where it matters. For example, [tell them
that]theprotectionandgooduseofanancientvillagecandeveloptourism…andincreasevil-
lage income … Third, let the People’s Congress, Chinese People’s Political Consultative
Conference, celebrities, and the masses speak on our behalf. Our small director’s forthright
opposition to the superior’s improper policy is far less effective than that of the People’s
Congress, People’s Political ConsultativeConference, and celebrities. Even a joint petition of
opposition by the masses is more effective than our opposition … Anyway, [you] grassroots
directors…thereisnoneedtotoughitoutagainstindividuallaw-breakingleaders…andsac-
rificeinvain.26
Thissameperformanceimperativehasledtowidespreadlocalstateinitiativesto
commodify temple assets and religious services, despite the repeated condemna-
tions of the central authorities. As one Buddhist monk explained:
Thisisamatterofdifferentinterests…Thecentreandprovincialgovernmentsmayfocusmore
on the [long-term] cultural and political effects that result, whereas local governments place
moreemphasisonlocaleconomicdevelopment.Alocalleader’spromotionordemotioniscon-
tingentoneconomicdevelopment.Eachtermisonlyfiveyears.Aslongasheensuresthatno
bigsocialincidentbreaksoutduringhisfive-yeartenurewhilehemakesadvancesintheecon-
omy,heislikelytogetpromoted.Anyrepercussionsfromhistenurewouldbetheproblemof
hissuccessor…thebenefitsofpromotingculturecannotbeseenwithinoneortwoterms.[Ifhe
choosestodoso],hewouldbehelpinghis[successors]/competitorsbyaddingtotheirachieve-
ments.Thishasresultedintheshort-sightednessoflocalofficials.Asfarastheyareconcerned,
thekeyistoturnaculturalbrandintoreal,visiblebenefitsduringtheirtenure…[Thisis]the
reasonwhylocalgovernmentsinChinahaveconstantlyattemptedtoenclosefamousmountains
andgreatrivers(mingshandachuan名山大川)withscenicparks.27
UnliketheinstitutionalmyopiaoflocalPartyleaders,theleadersofhistorictem-
ples have a much longer-term outlook owing to beliefs that extend beyond this
worldly existence, the spiritual lineage tradition and the immobility of historic
temple assets.
The Logic of the Spiritual Economy
The Buddhist cosmology maintains that the universe is the result of karma, the
law of causes and effects of actions.28 People are bound to the cycle of death
andrebirth(samsara),whichspansmillionsoflifetimes.Gooddeedsbringbetter
rebirths, whereas negative behaviour leads to bad results. Rebirth as a human is
26 He2012.Author’stranslation.
27 Personalcommunicationwithreligiousleader,August2015.
28 Broadlydefined,thesecovernotonlyverbalactionsandbodilyactionsbutalsomentalactions,suchas
intentions,thoughtsandemotions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 7 ---
446 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
considered to be a privilege because the human facultyof freewill and the com-
binationofpainandpleasurethatexistsuniquelyinthehumanexperienceiscon-
ducive to enlightenment through which one obtains a passage out of samsara.29
Taoism has over the course of centuries appropriated Buddhist ideas about the
afterlife.30 Taoists believe that one can attain immortality through holistic self-
cultivation to find harmony with the cosmic order (dao 道).
Merit (gongde 功德) is a Buddhist and Taoist reference to virtuous achieve-
ment. A person’sstockofmerit can bring benefits, such asimmortalityordeliv-
erancefrompotentialsuffering,andabetterrebirth,tothislifeandthelifeafter.
Meritcanbetransferredtoanotherlivingpersonorredirectedtothedeceased.It
canbeearnedandamassedthroughundertakingbenevolentdeedsandfollowing
thedao.Inadditiontodoinggooddeeds,onecanobtainmeritbyparticipatingin
Buddhistand Taoistrites.Ritual assembliesbring in crowdsand provideoppor-
tunities for the temple to collect donations. Examples include regular ritual
assemblies (every first and 15th day of the lunar calendar) and the annual festi-
vals of the Taoist zhongyuan 中元 and Buddhist yulanpen 盂兰盆 (the 15th day
oftheseventhlunarmonth)whentemplesperformtheritesofuniversalsalvation
(pudu 普渡) and almsgiving to hungry ghosts to deliver them from suffering,
soothe their spirits, and therefore remit the harmful effects they might bring.
Many temples also hold additional activities that cater to the interests of the
community.Some temples,forexample,performmeritrituals duringthecollege
and middle school entrance exams to give blessings to students hoping to gain
better test results.31
Mosttemplesalsoprovidealistofmerititemsthatlaypeoplecansponsorfor
themselves and their families. Common merit items can include the necessities
that go with a ritual assembly (for example, altar construction, offerings, meals
for participants), items for daily operation (for example, oil for eternal light,
meals for the monks and volunteers, dharma instruments for thesangha, temple
brochures), or materials for temple construction and maintenance (for example,
statues,pillars,roof tiles, bricks, bells and drums). The priceof amerit item can
rangefromhundredsofthousandyuanto“meritdonationatwill”(suixigongde
随喜功德).Laypeoplecanalsogainmeritbyvolunteeringatthetemple.Afree-
accesstemple’s day-to-day tasks, including cooking, gardening, cleaning, receiv-
ing guests, sales, tour-guiding and driving, rely heavily on lay volunteers.
Individual contributions to the temple, regardless of the form and amount, are
considered as equally meritorious and will therefore create boundless merit
(gongdewuliang功德无量).Thecontinuoussponsorshipoflayfollowersdepends
on the temple’s welcoming reputation and its ability to sustain the belief that its
followers are accumulating merit and advancing religiously.
29 Harvey2000,150–56.
30 Zürcher1980.
31 Interviewwithreligiousleader,Huzhou,June2012.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 8 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 447
The transhistorical nature of these beliefs tends to generate an outlook that
extends beyond the rule of any political leader and has helped to sustain and is
sustainedbythefactthattheexistingmajorBuddhistandTaoistlineagesandpil-
grimage centres have outlasted all political governments in Chinese history.
Regardless of the school, the concept of universal sangha allows all Buddhist
lineages to be traced back to the Buddha; the line of the Celestial Master of
the Taoist Zhengyi School has continued for 64 generations since it was first
established in the second century.
The religious beliefs and the institutional practice of undisrupted spiritual
linages influence the temple leaders’viewofthe physicaltempleand its relation-
ship with the political government. First of all, temples are immovable, which
renders them vulnerable to hostile governments. Historic temples are especially
so because they are also irreplaceable. They are not just religious venues; they
aretheembodimentoftheirseparatespirituallineages.Thesurvivalofahistoric
temple’s material and symbolic assets depends on state toleration, if not
protection.
Second,templepropertiesarecommunal.Asidefrombeingthenexusofsocial
andspirituallife,atempleisaboveallthematerialmanifestationofacommunal
network. Temple assets come from “ten directions” (shifang 十方). Temple con-
struction and maintenance test a religious community’s capacity to coordinate
and pool resources.A successfultemple often has adiverseand powerfulpatron
base. The communal nature of a temple’s properties means that the temple has
the social and economic potential for popular mobilization.
Third, the majority of historic temples are also home to the sangha, making
them not only immovable and communal assets but also residential sites. Most
ofthese temples’ leaders are members ofthelocal and national Chinesepeople’s
political consultative conferences or people’s congresses. To the resident monks
and nuns, a temple is more than a religious space: it provides all their social
and material necessities, including education, shelter, livelihood, healthcare and
old-agecare.Residentialmonksthereforehaveasignificantstakeinthemanage-
mentofthetemple.Thesetempleleaders’institutionalpositionshavemadethem
leading players in the contestation over the use of temple property.32
Becauseafree-accesstemple operatesthrough laypeople’spursuit ofreligious
merits, not only in the form of monetary donations but also in labour contribu-
tions, its leaders invest a great deal of time cultivating relations with lay fol-
lowers. The logic of the merit economy is not based on commercial
transactions but on merit exchange and accumulation under clerical leadership.
32 Forexample,BuddhistandTaoistrepresentativeshavesince2007pushedthestatetoresolvethelackof
legalpersonhoodamongtemples.Thestaterespondedbycreatingapathwayforreligiousgroupingsto
obtainsuchstatusinthe2018RegulationsonReligiousAffairs.Theyhavealsosuccessfullypressedthe
NationalDevelopmentofReformCommissiontoissueadecreeexemptingBuddhistandTaoistclergy
andconvertsfromhavingtopayadmissionsduringtheirtemplevisits.Thecourthasalsobecomea
popular channel through which temple leaders can protest against religious symbols being used as
trademarks.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 9 ---
448 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
Asizablefree-accesstemplemightthereforesuggestanactivereligiousleadership
thatis able to unite and mobilize the layfollowers. However,commodified tem-
pleaccessandreligiousservicescancrippleatemple’sreligiousfunctionsandhin-
der the leadership of the sangha. It can also lead to a net loss of temple income
that would otherwise be reinvested in religious development.
In sum, the pressure of pricing historic temple access and religious services is
constant. Financially, temple leaders need income to support the sangha as
well as the daily operation and maintenance of a temple. Politically, local state
leaders,whocontrolthePartyapparatus,areincentivizedtoexploittempleprop-
ertiescommercially.Tomaintainfreeaccess,thetempleleadershipmustkeepthe
temple financially solvent while simultaneously resisting external pressures to
commodifytempleassets.Theadmissionpolicyofanindividualtemplethussig-
nals the degree of autonomy enjoyed by the religious leaders of that temple.
Admission as a Measurement of Religious Commodification
Owingtothedisparitiesininstitutionalpreference,localcadresandreligiouslea-
ders tend to diverge on the usage of religious sites and temple incomes. On the
one hand, self-interested local officials strive to produce short-term, measurable
economicreturnsfromtemplecommodification.Ontheotherhand,religiouslea-
dersaspiretorevivetheirspirituallineageandmonasticinstitutionsbybuildinga
sustainable merit economy.As previously mentioned, religious commodification
comes in a range of forms, but setting up a religious scenic park, which is man-
agedbythelocalstate-ownedtouristagencyormanagementcommittee,hasbeen
thestandardformula.Byenclosingatemplewithinapark,thelocalstateisable
to create and monopolize income otherwise unavailable to it, for example from
admission fees, transportation, incense sales, and so on.
Park authorities and temple leaders often hold conflicting views regarding the
use of temple property, but the tension drew public attention when the tourist
agencies of China’s four major Buddhist pilgrimage centres sought initial public
offerings (IPO). The first, Mount Emei 峨眉山, went public in 1997. The com-
pany included admission revenues (roughly 40 per cent of its total income) in
theIPO,sparkingpublicoutrageaboutwhatwasseenastheprivatizationofreli-
giouspropertiesandprofit-makingfromsacredsymbols.33Statepolicyhassince
ruled against such practices. Mount Jiuhua 九华山 successfully went public in
2015, without bundling its admission revenues, but Mount Putuo’s and Mount
Wutai’s 五台山 recent IPO applications have been withdrawn or rejected
owing to strong opposition from the religious community and its supporters in
the central state.34
33 SeeFn.18.
34 “Zhengjianhui: Putuoshan lüyouIPO shenqing yichehui” (China Securities Regulatory Commission:
Putuo Mountain Tourism Development Company Limited’s IPO application has been withdrawn).
Xinhuanet, 19 April 2018, http://www.xinhuanet.com/2018-04/19/c_1122710643.htm. Accessed 6
December2018.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 10 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 449
Asfarastempleleadersareconcerned,freeaccessnotonlydistinguishesatemple
fromthosecontrolledbythegovernmentandothercommercialinterestsbutitalso
showcases the clergy’s leadership role in the spiritual community. During my
fieldwork,Ifoundthistobeacommonlyheldviewamongbothreligiousleaders
andlayfollowers,whofrequentlyemphasizedthatfreeaccesssignalledatemple’s
authenticity.Itistruethatamidlocalstate-ledreligiouscommodification,ahigh
admission fee has been associated with “religion building the stage to sing the
economicopera,”usingreligiontorakeinmoney(jiejiaoliancai借教敛财),reli-
gious commercialism and alackofreligious authenticityand spiritual authority.
But why do some temples continue to charge admission?
Despitetheirpreference,templeleadershavetoadjusttheirbehaviouraccord-
ing to the material and institutional resources available to them. After the
Cultural Revolution, in order to re-establish temples as religious institutions,
the sangha had to be revived and the physical temples reconstructed. At the
time, there were very few practising monks and nuns left, and a new generation
had yet to come of age. Temples in general were not equipped to perform ritual
services and the lay community was yet to be established. Most temples were in
needofrepairandreconstruction,butthestatepolicyof“self-supportingtemples
and self-financing reconstructions” (yisi yangsi, zichou zijian 以寺养寺, 自筹自
建)intheearly1980sputastoptofinancialaidfromthegovernment.Manytem-
ples resorted to collecting admission feesto support the sangha and fund temple
reconstructions.35 The early reliance on admission fee income reduced the
urgencyandnecessitytocultivatealayfollowing,makingitdifficultfortemples
to become completely self-sufficient and withdraw from this initially expedient
practice. Some continue to charge admission fees but their religious predilection
would prevent them from charging high admission fees or commodifying
religious services.
Varieties of Temple Autonomy
I chose to examine the state of affairs of 163 “temples of national importance.”
These historic temples have prominent linages and were among the first sites to
be selected by the Buddhist and Taoist communities to return to the religious
community as part of the Party’s policy of religious restoration in 1983. In
2013, 162 of the temples were open to the public. The highest temple admission
feewas80yuan,thelowestwaszero,andtheaverageadmissionfeewassixyuan.
However,as61templeswerelocatedinsidescenicparks,whereadditionaladmis-
sionfeeswerecollectedbytheparkmanagement,therealaveragetempleadmis-
sioncanbedeemedtobe59yuan.Iidentifiedfourcategoriesoftemplesbasedon
their accessibility using temple admission: free access, tolling, scenic spot and
scenic park (see Table 1).
35 Interviewwithreligiousleader,Ningbo,July2012.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 11 ---
450 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
Table 1: Temple Cases According to Accessibility in 2012
Accessibility Cases
Free-access Freeandopentothepublic East*,Flower,Life,Zen,Purity
temple
Tolling Smalladmissionfee(under15yuan) North,Path,Compassion,
temple Longevity,Buddha*,West*
Scenic-spot Moderateadmissionfee(under50yuan); South,Literati,Garden,Wisdom
temple tourismoriented
Scenic-park Templeenclosedinascenicpark;park Open Cloud
temple admissionrequiredtoenter;park Tolling Being,Clarity,
designedformasstouristconsumption Harmony,Crystal,
Dragon*
Scenic- Light
spot
Notes:
*Changedcategoryduringtheperiodofthisresearch.
First,afree-accesstemplehasafree-for-allentrypolicy,whichmeansthatitis
able to maintain internal financial solvency and so resist external commodifica-
tion pressure from local state agents. A free-access temple has the highest level
of autonomy. Second, a tolling temple collects a small admission fee from non-
members (i.e. visitors who do not provide proof of having converted to the reli-
gion) and does not share the admission income with any state agents. A tolling
temple has a high degree of autonomy but has yet to achieve financial solvency
throughitsmeriteconomy.Third,ascenic-spottempleisofficiallyclassifiedasa
scenicspot.Itisalsounderthesupervisionofthetourismbureauwhoseinterests
intouristflowsoftenlimitthereligiousleadership’scourseofaction.Inaddition,
the temple has to meet a variety of requirements with regard to tourist services,
security,sanitation,transportationandcommunication.Withhigheroperational
costs,ascenic-spottemple’sadmissionfeetendstobehigherthanthatfortolling
temples. Finally, a scenic-park temple is enclosed within a scenic park managed
byalocalstatetourismagency.Visitorsmustpurchaseaparkticketbeforebeing
abletoaccessthetemple.Templeleadershavelittlesayinthemanagementofthe
scenicpark.Often,enclosedtemplescollecttheirownadmission feesratherthan
partner up with the park authorities to set a unified price policy.
The cases in Table 1 were selected to capture the range of this variation. An
analysis of the cases shows that the average admission fee rose from eight yuan
to 31 yuan if park admission is included. Among the sites surveyed, the leaders
of the five free-access temples all emphasized that free access was a marker of
their religious authenticity, a discourse which resonated with the statements I
collected from lay people. The evidence shows that, given the choice, a great
majority of temples would prefer to charge lower, if not zero, admission fees.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 12 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 451
A temple can transfer from one category to another depending on its internal
material circumstances and ability to override external pressures to commodify
temple access. Among the 22 temples surveyed, three changed their admission
policies during the period of this research: Temple Dragon, Temple Buddha
and Temple West. Temple Buddha and Temple West joined the ranks of free-
access temples in 2012 after previously being a tolling temple and a scenic-
park/tolling temple, respectively. The transition to free access is not unilinear.
Temple Dragon, previously a free-access temple, became enclosed after the
independent-minded leadership of Temple East withdrew from the site. In
whatfollows,Iwill discuss in detail how the leaderships of all four temples con-
fronted the pressure to commodify temple access.
Transition to free access: (re-)building religious authenticity
TempleWest’stransitiontoafree-accesstemplewasonlypossiblethankstothree
decades of monastic reconstruction. According to the abbot, the temple used to
behometoover500residentmonksuntiltheywereforcedtodisbandin1969.By
theendoftheCulturalRevolution,mostofthetemplestructureremained,butall
sutrasandstatuesweredestroyed.Itwasoneofthefirsttemplestoreopen,owing
toits lineage connection with JapaneseBuddhism.The government supplied the
initial funding for the temple reconstruction, and 50monks returnedin 1980 –a
smallnumbercomparedtoprevioustimes,yetstillremarkablewhenconsidering
that these monks had recently endured severe persecution. After the state intro-
duced the policy of “self-supporting temples and self-funding reconstructions”
in 1985, the temple began to collect entrance fees.
Over the years, Temple West accumulated some assets as a tolling temple. By
2012, it had 110 monks in residence, a solid lay following and strong ties with
overseas Buddhist communities. The monastic institution was well maintained
becausethenewgenerationofmonksweretrainedbyagroupofcommitted,eld-
erlymonkswhostillmadeupthesubstantiveportionofthesangha.Thecurrent
abbot described his appointment as a testament to the temple’s long-held trad-
ition as a public institution: if the residential monks are unable to agree on a
new abbot among themselves, they “select the worthy from ten directions” (shi-
fang xuanxian 十方选贤), based on the candidate’s “integrity, Buddhistlearning
andpatriotism.”Sufficeittosay,theleadershipofTempleWestcommandedthe
spiritual authority of a public temple. Yet, their decision to transition to free
access was actually triggered by an external crisis.
Although the religious community reclaimed the temple’s premises, the forest
areathatwashistoricallyconsideredtobeanintegralpartofthetemplewasstill
controlled by the local forestry department, which charged a 20-yuan entrance
fee. Beginning in October 2011, the district government blocked the path to
the temple and the forestry area and imposed a 50-yuan admission fee. Visitors
now had to pay 50 yuan to enter the forestry area and 60 yuan (50 yuan for
the park entry and 10 yuan for the temple) to access the temple, which
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 13 ---
452 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
immediatelyreducedthenumberoftouriststothesitebyhalf.Thetemplethere-
fore suffered a net loss in admission-fee income and donations and its religious
outreach and reputation were also damaged. It was under this circumstance
that the temple leadership pushed for the transition to a free-access temple.
Just six months after the path was blocked, the temple scrapped its entrance
charge(10yuan)andpersuadedthelocalgovernmenttoalsolifttheparkadmis-
sion(50yuan).Itwasnotahardnegotiationbecausetheenclosurenotonlyhad
failed to generate morerevenue for the districtgovernment owing to the drop in
tourist flows but it had also upset locals who had previously enjoyed low-cost
access to both the temple (10 yuan) and the forest area (20 yuan). Faced with
mounting criticism, the district authorities soon announced that local visitors
could purchase the park ticket at a discounted rate of 20 yuan; the 50-yuan
parkadmissionremainedinplaceforout-of-towntourists.Thetempleleadership
wasabletoconvincethegovernment tore-open thepathand revertedtoitspre-
viouspolicyofcharging20yuanforadmissiontotheforestarea.Nowthatthere
was no temple admission fee, the district government could hope to restore
demand for the site and benefit from the popularity of a free-access temple.
The enclosure of Temple West and its conversion to a free-access temple
affected Temple Buddha, which is only less than ten miles away. The district
authorities had approached the Temple Buddha leadership multiple times with
ascenicparkproposal,whichwasrepeatedlyrejectedbythemonks.Fromageo-
graphical perspective, enclosure of Temple Buddhawould be unfeasible without
the monks’ cooperation. Unlike Temple West, access to which is through
government-controlled forest, Temple Buddha is located in an urban area.
Enclosingthetemplewithoutthemonks’consentwouldrequirethelocalgovern-
ment to block access to the temple from all directions, making the project
unworkable. During the enclosure of Temple West, Temple Buddha, then a tol-
ling temple charging 10 yuan, received more tourists than Temple West for the
first time, making TempleBuddhathe true beneficiary ofTemple West’senclos-
ure. As might be expected, when Temple West proposed scrapping its entrance
fee, Temple Buddha followed suit.
Temple West was not able to stop the district government from setting up a
ticket booth on its doorstop until it became obvious that enclosure also hurt
the political leadership as visitors voted with their feet and chose the much
more accessible Temple Buddha. Temple West’s leaders seized the opportunity
topushforachangetofreeaccessinthehopethattheycouldrecoupthematerial
and symbolic losses suffered by the temple during its enclosure. This move sub-
sequently had an impact on its competitor, Temple Buddha. Both temples had
beentollingtemplesforalmostthreedecadesandwouldprobablyhavecancelled
all admission fees eventually, given their institutional preference and improved
material conditions. Yet, it was the crisis of enclosure that unexpectedly made
freeaccesstheoptimalchoiceforallpartiesinvolved,includingthepoliticallead-
ership whose self-restraint was necessary not only for the creation but also
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 14 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 453
consolidation of a free-accesstemple, a point towhich I now turn in a compari-
son of the cases of Temple East and Temple Dragon.
The consolidation of free access: the role of local state agents
The reconstructions of Temple East and Temple Dragon were initiated by the
prefectural governments with a view to expanding incoming tourism. The two
governmentsinvitedthesameeminentBuddhistmastertore-establishthemonas-
tic institutions. Under their religious leaders, both temples had successfully
inspired local followings. They were also presented as shining examples of their
respective local governments’ achievementsto upper-level officials on inspection
tours. The religious leadership, however, withdrew from Temple Dragon after
three years owing to the incessant conflicts with the political leadership over
the temple’s admission fees. It did, however, manage to consolidate Temple
East’s free-access status by signing a formal contract with the local government
which protected the temple from any future enclosure.
TempleEastwasrebuiltfromscratchhalfamileawayfromitsoriginalsite,in
linewiththe“relocationandrebuilding”(yidichongjian异地重建)strategy.This
approach to temple revival is often used as the majority of temple structures in
China were either completely destroyed or occupied by the state for other pur-
posesoverthecourseofacenturyofconflictandregimehostility.Theprefectural
government presented the reconstruction proposal to the temple’s most famous
living disciple, an abbot who had received dharma transmission in the historical
Temple East, making the temple home to the spiritual lineage he had inherited.
Since the original Temple East was completely erased and its original site had
become a residential area, the local government proposed three locations for
the abbot to choose from. One of them was in a scenic park that the authorities
hadalreadybeguntoconstruct;itwasalsotheonethattheabbotchosebecause
of its splendid scenery, infrastructure and largely unpopulated space.
Locals returned three stelae that they had rescued from the original temple
beforeitwasdestroyed.Thegovernmentprovidedthefirstpieceofland(aquar-
ter of the land needed for the project) in 2004 to assist the reconstruction. The
temple leadership would be responsible for funding the rest of the project and
the government would provide the infrastructure around the temple.
The relationship between the local state and temple was initially amicable;
however, the local public security monitored the temple’s activities closely and,
according to the monks, would arbitrarily stop a ritual assembly if it had not
been made aware of the event beforehand. The constant local interventions
caused a slowdown of the temple’s expansion plans and forced the temple
leadership to be more transparent with the local government with respect to its
operations. This change had generated positive results:
We’velearnedtoinformthegovernmentaboutouractivities.Theyweresuspiciousatthebegin-
ning,butnowtheyunderstandthatweposenothreat.Theyhaveevenbeenadvisingusabout
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 15 ---
454 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
convenientwaystoplanouractivities.Ifaspecificmethodwon’tworkowingtoofficialpolicy
restrictions,theywillhelpustofindanalternative.36
The tensions arising from the state’s demand for social control were basically
resolvedafterTempleEastbecamemoretransparentintheeyesofthelocaloffi-
cials. Temple East’s willingness to accommodate the regime’s security concerns
was shared by the leaders of other temples, who often stated explicitly in the
interviews: “Buddhism (Taoism) does not oppose the Communist Party.” Yet,
the abbot was well aware that this seemingly cordial relationship was owing to
thelackofreligiouscompetitionandthetemple’scontributiontothelocalprofile
and economy.
Ofcourse,thegovernmentwould[continueto]watchusandotherreligiousgroupswould[still]
be jealous. The local Buddhist Association is small, but we still have to respect them as our
superior. We pay the annual membership fee. The bigger the temple, the higher the fee …
Thiscitywasnotfamous.Thelocalgovernmentwanteddevelopment.Wehavebroughtintour-
istflowsandwe’vecreatedaverygoodimageforthelocalgovernment.37
Over the years, the government had tried multiple times to fence in the scenic
park and each time was dissuaded by the temple leadership. To counter the
repeated pressure to enclose the park that stemmed from the frequent rotation
of local cadres, the temple eventually proceeded with a formal contract:
Manylocalgovernmentslookatthetempleasasourceofrevenue.Theprefecturalgovernment
developedthesurroundingareaaspartoftheattempttoenclosethetemplesothattheycould
collectadmissionfees.ButtheMasterwouldneveragree.Hehasmadeitclearthatthemoment
wehavetocollectentrancefeestosurviveisthemomentweclosethetemple.Hehascommu-
nicatedwiththelocalgovernmentandmadethePartysecretarypromisethathiscommitment
willstillbe bindingtohis successors.[Therefore,]wesignedacontract withthe localgovern-
ment,and[thecontract]hastheofficialsealonit.38
Themonksviewedfreeaccessasthemarkerofthetemple’sauthenticityandtheir
commitment to spread the dharma. It was mentioned in the standard introduc-
tion that the monks and lay volunteers presented to visiting groups of pilgrims.
It also allowed the temple to attract an average of 2,000 visitors on a normal
weekday. The small donations collected from the merit boxes (gongde xiang 功
德箱) were enough to cover the utilities of the entire temple. The temple had
twovegetarianrestaurants,which wererun exclusively byvolunteers.The clergy
heldbiweeklyritualassembliestoprovideritualservicestothecommunityandto
attract donations. The temple funded its reconstruction by attracting separate
donations through a list of merit items. “Where there is dharma, there is a
way. The Buddha will not let me starve,” the abbot told me. With a viable
merit economy and commitment in the form of a formal contract with the
local government, Temple East finally consolidated its free-access status.
Similarly,allthatwasleftontheoriginalsiteofTempleDragonwasapagoda.
The prefectural government decided to build a new temple adjacent to the
pagoda and make the complex a tourist attraction. The government planned a
36 Interviewwithreligiousleader,Nanjing,April2013.
37 Interviewwithreligiousleader,Nanjing,June,2013.
38 Ibid.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 16 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 455
77-acre scenic park and invested nearly 40 million yuan in the first stage of con-
struction, which was completed in 2009. Meanwhile, the authorities, hoping to
find additional funding for the temple’s reconstruction, approached Temple
East’s leaders, who saw this invitation as an opportunity to revive Buddhism
in a different area. Following the same model that was applied to Temple
East, the leaders of Temple Dragon were expected to establish the temple’s
monasticinstitutionandraisefundsforthesecondandfinalstagesofreconstruc-
tion. The local government would be in charge of land expropriation, including
the cost of compensation and the relocation of local residents.
The monks in Temple Dragon were instructed by their master to do all the
hard work but let the local government claim the credit, a strategy that had
worked well for Temple East. At the opening ceremony, the temple leadership
mobilized nearly a hundred volunteers. In addition to the leaders from various
temples and Buddhist associations, the provincial propaganda minister, deputy
heads of the provincial religious bureau and cultural authorities attended the
ceremony.Theeventalsoattractedthousandsoflaypeopleandtouristswhopar-
ticipated in the ritual assembly led by the abbot. A ceremonyof this kind was a
great public relations coup for the leaders of the local government, who would
not normally have had the opportunity to sit side-by-side with provincial-level
officials. TempleDragonbecame apopular destination forlocal leaders wishing
toimpressguests, somuch sothatthemanaging monks grumbled about finding
the time to accommodate the various ranks of visiting cadres (who rarely both-
ered to notify them in advance) into their already busy schedule. The leaders
ofTempleEasthadtoreceivegovernmentofficialsaswell,butsincethetemple’s
spiritual authority was already well established, they were no longer expected to
personally receive political leaders from below the prefectural level.
LikeTempleEast,TempleDragonheldbiweeklyritualassemblieswhichwere
opentothegeneralpublic.Inaddition,themonksheldSundaydharmalearning
sessions whose regulars included the wives of local cadres. The free and high-
quality ritual services quickly allowed the temple to develop a devout following.
More importantly, the temple introduced a new way of practising Buddhism to
thelocalcommunity,whichpreviouslyhadnothadmuchexposuretothesangha
and religious services other than through simply visiting temples and making
donations. Temple Dragon’s success thus directly challenged the monopoly of
the nearby Temple Unity.
Temple Unity was reconstructed in 1993 as one of the tourist attractions in a
scenicpark.Overthelastdecades,thetempleleadershipandthelocalauthorities
hadforgedasymbioticrelationship.Theabbotprovidedlocal officialswitheco-
nomic rent and political loyalty in exchange for his ascendancy in the local
Buddhist association and protection against accusations of misconduct such as
drinking, gambling, bribery, misappropriation and violations of celibacy. As
Temple Dragon’s presence became an obvious threat to the existing local
Buddhist establishment, Temple Unity’s leaders exploited the government’s
distrust of mass gatherings by accusing Temple Dragon of spreading
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 17 ---
456 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
anti-governmentteachingsduringitsritualassemblies.ThetrustbetweenTemple
Dragonandthelocalauthoritiesbecameevenmoreprecariouswhenanewlocal
governmentcadretookofficeandTempleDragonrejectedhisproposaltocharge
and split admission fees. In addition, the authorities had failed to expropriate
enough land for further reconstruction. The Temple East leadership eventually
decided to end its partnership with the local government and withdrew from
TempleDragon,whichatthetimecreatedanoutcryonthegovernment’sonline
forum.
Our followers were all crying as they were helping us pack … The prefectural government’s
online messageboard wasflooded with messages requesting the governmentnot to letus go.
Theauthoritiesevenaskedustotellourfollowerstostoppostingmessages.Butthosemessages
wereleftmostlybypeoplewhohadvisitedthetemplebutwerenotfollowersthemselves.39
Afterthemonksleft,thegovernmentintroducedamorecooperativetemplelead-
ership. TempleDragonsoonbegan tochargeadmission feesand thereconstruc-
tion effort wasresumed,but thistimewith the support ofTempleUnityand the
local Buddhist association.
The four case studies show that a temple’s transition from one category to
another represents a change in its material circumstances and negotiation
power vis-à-vis the local state agents. The move towards free access indicates
an increasingly confident temple leadership capable of converting its spiritual
authority into material income and political capital. Yet, the attitude of the
localstateremainsthedominantfactorinthereligioususageoftempleproperty.
The leaders of all four temples avoided direct confrontation with the local
authorities. This is because in an authoritarian setting, a temple’s daily opera-
tions dependon the non-interferenceof thelocal state.TempleDragon’sleaders
were forced to abandon the reconstruction project in the face of an increasingly
hostile local government that was colluding with the co-opted monks occupying
the leadership positions in the local Buddhist association.
Conclusion
Thispapersituatesthecommodificationofandcontestationovertempleproperty
intheinstitutionsoflocaleconomicdevelopmentandthematerialcircumstances
of the monastic institutions. I argue that the Chinese Communist Party’s
emphasis on economic growth has created behavioural incentives for local state
agents to commodify temple assets, despite such practices violating the Party’s
own religious policy. As a countermeasure and given the choice, temple leaders
strive for a donation-based merit economy in order to gain control over temple
assets and demonstrate their spiritual authenticity. Hence, a temple’s manage-
ment autonomy must be negotiated on two fronts: internally with lay followers,
so as to establish a sustainable merit economy, and externally with local state
agents, by demonstrating political conformity and emphasizing the temple’s
39 Ibid.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 18 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 457
economic contributions. These findings show the contradictions in the Chinese
state’s management of organized Buddhism and Taoism and help us to under-
stand the antinomy of authoritarian state legitimation. In addition, the focus
on property politics reveals the material foundation of organized Buddhism
andTaoism’sresilienceaswelltheirweakness:themeriteconomyhelpstosustain
the temple as a religious institution and enhances the leadership’s spiritual
authority. But, owing to the immobility and irreplaceability of historic temple
assets, temple leaders try to avoid antagonizing local authorities, which in turn
restricts a temple’s potential for social mobilization. It is true that free access is
demonstrative of a temple’s institutional strength and a local state–temple rela-
tionship that is simultaneously contentious and conciliatory; however, as such
management autonomy must operate within the authoritarian state’s regulatory
framework, organized Buddhism and Taoism’s restrained contestation actually
helps to strengthen the state’s control over these religions.
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their useful com-
ments on an earlier version of this manuscript.
Biographical note
Kuei-minCHANGisapostdoctoralresearchfellowattheInstituteofSociology,
Academia Sinica, Taipei. Her research interests include religion and politics,
authoritarianism, property and state formation.
摘摘要要: 本研究以当代中国地方政府主导下的宗教商品化为背景，调查寺庙
财产使用的政教争端。借由对 22 个著名历史寺庙的比较研究，本文主张
在有选择的情况下，寺庙领导两面协商庙产管理的自主性：面对地方政府
及其代理人，由于庙产的不可移动性，寺庙领导选择展现政治顺服和强调
寺庙的经济贡献；面对信众，他们力求建立以宗教捐献为主的功德经济来
维持寺庙的存续。但由于此自主性是建立在威权统治的政经架构上，寺庙
领导克制的抗争模式反而强化了国家对其宗教的控制。
关关键键词词:宗教商品化;寺庙复兴;宗教政治经济学;信仰经济;宗教自主;宗教
财产; 中国
References
Ashiwa,Yoshiko,andDavidL.Wank.2006.“ThepoliticsofarevivingBuddhisttemple:state,asso-
ciation,andreligioninsoutheastChina.”TheJournalofAsianStudies65(2),337–359.
Birnbaum,Raoul.2003.“BuddhistChinaatthecentury’sturn.”TheChinaQuarterly174,428–450.
Brook, Timothy. 2009. “The politics of religion: late imperial origins of the regulatory state.” In
YoshikoAshiwaandDavidL.Wank(eds.),MakingReligion,MakingtheState:ThePoliticsof
ReligioninModernChina.Stanford,CA:StanfordUniversityPress,22–42.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 19 ---
458 The China Quarterly, 242, June 2020, pp. 440–459
Chan,SelinaChing.2005.“TemplebuildingandheritageinChina.”Ethnology44(1),65–79.
Chan,SelinaChing,andGraemeS.Lang.2007.“Templeconstructionandrevivalofpopularreligion
inJinhua.”ChinaInformation21(1),43–69.
Chan,SelinaChing,andGraemeS.Lang.2011.“Templeasenterprises.”InAdamYuetChau(ed.),
ReligioninContemporaryChina:RevitalizationandInnovation.NewYork:Routledge,133–153.
Chang, Kuei-min. 2018. “New wine in old bottles: Sinicisation and state regulation of religion in
China.”ChinaPerspectives2018(1–2),37–44.
Chau,AdamYuet.2005.“ThepoliticsoflegitimationandtherevivalofpopularreligioninShaanbei,
north-centralChina.”ModernChina31(2),236–278.
Dean, Kenneth. 2003. “Local communal religion in contemporary south-east China.” The China
Quarterly174,338–358.
Eaton, Sarah, and Genia Kostka. 2014. “Authoritarian environmentalism undermined? Local
leaders’ time horizon and environmental policy implementation in China.” The China Quarterly
218,359–380.
Edin,Maria.2003.“Remakingthecommunistparty-state:thecadreresponsibilitysystematthelocal
levelinChina.”China:AnInternationalJournal1(1),1–15.
Fisher,Gareth.2008.“Thespirituallandrush:meritandmoralityinnewChineseBuddhisttemple
construction.”JournalofAsianStudies67(1),143–170.
Fisher, Gareth. 2011. “In the footsteps of the tourists: Buddhist revival at museum/temple sites in
Beijing.”SocialCompass58(4),511–524.
Harvey,Peter.2000.AnIntroductiontoBuddhistEthics:Foundations,Values,andIssues.Cambridge:
CambridgeUniversityPress.
He,Qiang.2012.“Hejicengwenwuguanlisuozhangshuodianxinlihua”(Speakingafewwordsfrom
the heart with the directors of grassroots-level administrations of protected cultural relics).
Zhongguowenwubao,12December.
Hillman,Ben.2005.“MonasticpoliticsandthelocalstateinChina:authorityandautonomyinan
ethnicallyTibetanprefecture.”TheChinaJournal54,29–51.
Ji,Zhe.2011.“Buddhisminthereformera:asecularizedrevival?”InAdamYuetChau(ed.),Religion
inContemporaryChina:RevitalizationandInnovation.NewYork:Routledge,32–52.
Ji,Zhe.2012.“ChineseBuddhismasasocialforce:realityandpotentialofthirtyyearsofrevival.”
ChineseSociologicalReview45(2),8–26.
Jing,Jun.1999.“Villagesdammed,villagerepossessed:amemorialmovementinnorthwestChina.”
AmericanEthnologist26(2),324–343.
Kang,Xiaofei.2009.“Twotemples,threereligions,andatouristattraction:contestingsacredspace
onChina’sethnicfrontier.”ModernChina35(3),227–255.
Koesel, Karrie J. 2014. Religion and Authoritarianism: Cooperation, Conflict, and Consequences.
NewYork:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Lai,Chi-Tim.2003.“DaoisminChinatoday,1980–2002.”TheChinaQuarterly174,413–427.
Laliberté,André.2011.“Buddhistrevivalunderstatewatch.”JournalofCurrentChineseAffairs40
(2),107–134.
Landry, Pierre F., Xiaobo Lü and Haiyan Duan. 2018. “Does performance matter? Evaluating
political selectionalong theChineseadministrative ladder.” Comparative Political Studies 51(8),
1074–1105.
Li, Manchun. 1993. “Zhengque lijie he chuli zongjiao gongzuo zhong de jige bianzheng guanxi”
(Rightly understand and handle several dialectic relationships in religious work). Zhongyang
shehuizhuyixueyuanxuebao1993(6),41.
Madsen,Richard.2010.“TheupsurgeofreligioninChina.”JournalofDemocracy21(4),58–71.
Olson,Mancur.1993.“Dictatorship,democracy,anddevelopment.”TheAmericanPoliticalScience
Review87(3),567–576.
Potter,PitmanB.2003.“Beliefincontrol:regulationofreligioninChina.”TheChinaQuarterly174,
317–337.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press

--- Page 20 ---
Between Spiritual Economyand Religious Commodification 459
Whiting,Susan.2004.“Thecadreevaluationsystematthegrassroots:theparadoxofPartyrule.”In
BarryJ.NaughtonandDaliL.Yang(eds.),HoldingChinaTogether:DiversityandtheNational
IntegrationinthePost-DengEra.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress,101–119.
Xu,Chenggang.2011.“ThefundamentalinstitutionsofChina’sreformsanddevelopment.”Journal
ofEconomicLiterature49(4),1076–1151.
Yang,Fenggang.2004.“Betweensecularistideologyanddesecularizingreality:thebirthandgrowth
ofreligiousresearchinCommunistChina.”SociologyofReligion65(2),101–119.
Yu, Anthony C. 2005. State and Religion in China: Historical and Textual Perspectives. Chicago:
OpenCourt.
Zürcher,Eric.1980.“BuddhistinfluenceonearlyTaoism:asurveyofscripturalevidence.”T’oung
pao66(1),84–147.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030574101900122X Published online by Cambridge University Press