--- Page 1 ---
SACRED CAPITAL: PIERRE BOURDIEU AND THE STUDY
OF RELIGION
Hugh B. Urban
This article offers a critical analysis of Pierre Bourdieu’s work and its importance
for the study of religion. Analysis and criticim of Bourdieu’s theories with reference
to the example of the Bˆuls, a loose, eclectic tradition of wandering minstrels and
self-proclaimed spiritual “madmen”, which has flourished throughout Bengal
(northeast India and Bangladesh) since at least the late nineteenth century, was
chosen for two reasons: first, because much like Bourdieu, the Bˆuls make frequent
use of a “marketplace” metaphor to describe the larger realms of social interaction
and religious discourse; second, because the Bˆuls offer a powerful challenge to
Bourdieu’s work, demonstrating that there is perhaps far more room for subversion
and critique of the dominant “social marketplace” than his model of society and
culture seems to allow.
There is a need to radically question the economic view, which indi-
vidualizes everything—production as much as justice or health, costs as
well as profits ... . Against this narrow, short-term economics, we need
to put forward an economics of happiness. (Bourdieu 1998: 40)
Prince Hasan has caught God fever in the marketplace. ...
He dances, plays and sings this song of Love. (Bˆul song; Dasgupta and
Dasgupta 1977: 42)
Economics and religion, the marketplace and the temple: tradition-
ally, scholars of religion appear to have felt very nervous about bring-
ing these two spheres into too close a proximity. On one side, histo-
rians of religions trained in the lineage of Joachim Wach or Mircea
Eliade have long warned that “reductionism” is the cardinal sin in
the study of religion, which is claimed to be a sui generis or irreducible
phenomenon. Hence, economic reductionism or “vulgar econom-
ism” would be the most heinous crime of all (see Eliade 1958: xi).1
On the other side, those trained in Marxist and neo-Marxist tradi-
tions have typically wanted to explain religious myths and rituals
1 “To try to grasp the essence of such a phenomenon by means of physiology,
sociology, economics, linguistics, art, or any other study is false; it misses the irreduc-
ible element in it—the element of the sacred” (Eliade 1958: xi). For a good critique
of the sui generis argument, see McCutcheon 1997.
© Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, 2003 Method & Theory in the Study of Religion
15, 354-389

--- Page 2 ---
sacred capital 355
either as ideological screens masking deeper material forces or as
expressions of misrecognized social interests. In either case, the rela-
tionship between economics and religion, the marketplace and the
temple, remains one of the most poorly theorized areas in the com-
parative study of religions.
The work of Pierre Bourdieu has recently emerged as one of the
most influential models for the analysis of culture, a model that has
been widely adopted, debated, and discussed across the academic
disciplines. In part, the reason for his popularity has been his keen
insight into the “economic” nature of human action; indeed, his
over-arching metaphor to describe the cultural field is an economic
one, in which social agents are described as competitors for various
kinds of material and symbolic “capital” (Bourdieu 1985, 1987;
Jenkins 1992: 86). Strangely, however, Bourdieu has not yet been
taken up in any critical way within the academic study of religion
(which does often seem to lag a decade or so behind the rest of the
academy). Unlike Foucault, Derrida, or even Deleuze and Guattari
—who have been discussed widely for their relevance to the study of
religion—Bourdieu has only rarely been taken up by historians of
religions (Milner 1994; Bell 1992).2
The reasons for this neglect are twofold. The first is that much of
Bourdieu’s work appears, on the surface, to be hostile to religion, or
at least to reduce the dimension of the transcendent and sacred to the
material dimensions of self-interest and pursuit of profit. As Bourdieu
describes his own agenda, he wants to “utilize the economic model to
extend materialist critique into the realm of religion and to uncover
the specific interests of the protagonists of the religious game, priests,
prophets and sorcerers” (1990b: 107).The second reason for this ne-
glect is that Bourdieu rarely addresses the question of religion di-
rectly, and in the few cases where he does (1987b, 1991), he presents
some of his least sophisticated and most reductionistic analyses.
Hence many have concluded that Bourdieu’s discussion of religion is
among the least useful aspects of his work.
In this article I will critically analyze Bourdieu’s work and its im-
portance for the study of religion by exploring one religious tradition
2 Murray Milner (1994: 1-17) has used Bourdieu’s concepts of reproduction and
capital to examine the class system in India. However, his approach is more that of
a sociologist than that of a historian of religions. Catherine Bell (1992: 79-80, 176-
177) uses Bourdieu’s concept of habitus to examine religious ritual, but she does not
offer a rigorous discussion of his work or a critique of its problems.

--- Page 3 ---
356 hugh b. urban
with which I have a good deal of personal experience: the Bˆuls, a
loose, eclectic tradition of wandering minstrels and self-proclaimed
spiritual “madmen”, which has flourished throughout Bengal (north-
east India and Bangladesh) since at least the late nineteenth century.
I have chosen this particular example for two reasons: first, because
much like Bourdieu, the Bˆuls make frequent use of a “marketplace”
metaphor to describe the larger realms of social interaction and reli-
gious discourse; and second, because the Bˆuls offer a powerful chal-
lenge to Bourdieu’s work, demonstrating that there is perhaps far
more room for subversion and critique of the dominant “social mar-
ketplace” than his model seems to allow.
I will begin by outlining a few of Bourdieu’s major ideas—such as
strategy, habitus, and capital—as well as the most important objec-
tions to Bourdieu work (part 1). I will then discuss the usefulness of
Bourdieu’s model for understanding the specific case of the Bˆuls, a
case that reveals in a striking way both the potential advantages and
the problems with Bourdieu’s ideas for the study of religion (part 2).
Finally (part 3), I will suggest some of my own alternatives to the
problems in Bourdieu’s model. First, using some insights from Michel
de Certeau (1984), I will argue that we need to pay more attention to
the creative, “tactical” role of ordinary consumers within the social
and religious marketplace; we need to appreciate the ability of the
poor and marginalized to subvert, deform, or poach upon an oppres-
sive cultural market where the prices are inflated and the scales are
rigged. Second, I will also criticize Bourdieu’s rather cynical, pessi-
mistic view of human nature, which he sees as governed primarily by
self-interest and the pursuit of capital. Instead, I will argue for the
importance of other-interest in human action—that is, a concern for
other human beings and the desire to create a more egalitarian, or at
least less exploitative, form of human community. To conclude, I will
discuss the importance of Bourdieu’s work for rethinking the political
and ethical role of the history of religions today.
1. From material to spiritual capital: Key ideas in Bourdieu’s work and their
relevance for the study of religion
The science of economic practices is a particular case of a general science
of the economy of practices capable of treating all practices, including those
purporting to be disinterested ... and hence non-economic, as economic
practices directed toward the maximizing of material or symbolic profit.
(Bourdieu 1977: 183)

--- Page 4 ---
sacred capital 357
Spanning over three decades of consistent, prolific publication,
Bourdieu’s work is remarkably wide-ranging in its scope. It has also
been the subject of a formidable body of secondary scholarship, both
critical and sympathetic. Therefore, rather than try to summarize
Bourdieu’s oeuvre as a whole, I will briefly outline just a few of his key
ideas that are of most relevance to the comparative study of reli-
gion—most importantly, his concepts of strategy, habitus, and capital,
all of which have direct bearing on Bourdieu’s understanding of reli-
gion.
1.1. From rules to strategies: Bourdieu’s intellectual agenda
To substitute strategy for rule is to reintroduce time, with its rhythm, its
orientation, its irreversibility. (Bourdieu 1977: 9)
Much of Bourdieu’s work, as he explains his own intellectual agenda,
is an attempt to transcend the duality between subjectivism and ob-
jectivism, which, he thinks, characterizes much of modern sociology
and philosophy. On one side, there is the subjectivist view of the
existentialists and phenomenologists, who regard the human subject
as autonomous and radically free, largely independent of social or
material conditions. On the other side, there are the structuralists
such as Lévi-Strauss and Althusser, who seemingly erase the subject
altogether and replace it with a rigid system of objective rules and
unconscious laws. Yet neither of these models can adequately ac-
count for the complexity and subtly of social action. Instead,
Bourdieu offers a model that would take account of both the deep
structures that underlie much of culture, as well as the key role of
agency and creativity in human action (1977: 3-9, 106-109; Swartz
1997: 52).
In a crucial break with the structuralists, Bourdieu proposes a
fundamental shift from rules to strategies. Human beings are not simply
governed by deep structures and unconscious rules as Lévi-Strauss
suggests; rather, they also have the ability to manipulate these rules
strategically, in relation to their own personal and political interests.
Thus in his research on the Algerian Berber societies, Bourdieu
found that the structural rule ought to be that marriage should take
place between parallel cousins. And yet, in practice this “rule” was
followed only a mere three to four percent of the time; in the over-
whelming majority of cases, families manipulated the marital rules
strategically, bending, playing upon, and exploiting them in order to

--- Page 5 ---
358 hugh b. urban
negotiate the best possible marriage in terms of their own economic
prosperity, status, and prestige (1977: 42-46). Similarly, Bourdieu
suggests, all social action is based on these sorts of strategic manipu-
lations of social rules. Rather than rule-governed automatons trapped
in a static structure, human beings are strategic players who work
creatively within the limits of social structures. Social action thus
appears less as a static structural logic than as a temporal, dynamic,
and changing series of improvisations, comparable to the jazz play-
er’s creative improvisations on the rules that structure a given piece
of music (Fowler 1997: 2)
1.2. Political mythology embodied: Habitus, the body, and the social body
Symbolic power works ... through the control of bodies ... . Bodily hexis
is political mythology realized, em-bodied in a permanent disposition, a
durable way of standing, speaking, walking and thereby feeling and
thinking. (Bourdieu 1990a: 69-70)
Perhaps the most crucial element in Bourdieu’s model of agency and
his attempt to navigate between the extremes of subjectivism and
objectivism is the concept of habitus. Originally developed by Marcel
Mauss to describe the “habitual” and deeply incorporated nature of
human action, habitus has become a key term used to explain the
relationship between the individual human body and the larger social
body (Mauss 1979: 101). For Bourdieu, the habitus lies at the crucial
interface between the individual self and the larger social organism: it
is the means by which the structures of the social order are “in-
scribed”, encoded, or written into the individual body, in the most
corporeal forms of gestures, accents, patterns of dress, hairstyle, eat-
ing, walking, and talking. Through the habitus, the “political mythol-
ogy” of the social order is “made flesh”:
The source of historical action ... resides neither in consciousness nor in
things but in the relationship between two stages of the social, that is,
between the history objectified in things, in the form of institutions, and
the history incarnated in bodies, in the form of that system of enduring
dispositions which I call habitus. (Bourdieu 1990b: 190)
Above all, this inscription of the social body onto the individual
works through physical disciplines. As most tightly controlled organi-
zations, such as the military, sports teams, or monastic orders, have
long known, one of the most effective ways of forming a particular
kind of obedient self in union with the larger social order is through
routinized, repetitive, physical drills:

--- Page 6 ---
sacred capital 359
[T]here is a link between the body and ... ‘esprit de corps’ ... . If most
organizations—the church, the army, political parties—give such a
place to bodily disciplines, this is because obedience is belief and belief
is what the body grants even when the mind says no ... . Bodily disci-
pline is the instrument par excellence of domestication ... . Thus is ex-
plained the place that all totalitarian regimes give to bodily practices
which, by symbolizing the social, contribute to somatizing it ... . ‘Spir-
itual Exercises’ are bodily exercises. (Bourdieu 1990b: 167)
However, in response to his many critics, who see habitus as an ex-
tremely deterministic concept that leaves no room for resistance or
change, Bourdieu also insists that the concept of habitus does not
impose an absolute determinism. Rather, because action is always
strategic, improvisational, and creatively adjusted to its social con-
straints, the habitus is always open to a certain improvisation and
creative modification in response to changing historical circum-
stances. “Habitus is not the fate that some people read into it ... . It
is durable but not eternal!” (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992: 133)
1.3. Interest, profit, and capital: Economics as the ruling metaphor for social
action
Symbolic capital is ... economic or political capital that is disavowed,
misrecognized and thereby recognized, hence legitimate, a credit ...
which in the long run guarantees economic profit. (Bourdieu 1994: 75)
One of the most provocative—yet also problematic—aspects of
Bourdieu’s work is his use of the economic metaphor as an over-
arching framework to describe social action (Jenkins 1992: 86).3 Here
Bourdieu is at once extending and also critically modifying classical
Marxism. For whereas Marxism remains reductively bound to a
materialist view of social life, placing economic structures at the
center of action, Bourdieu extends the notion of economic interest to
ostensibly “non-economic” goods, that is, to the symbolic domain of
culture. Not just strictly economic activities, but all actions are funda-
mentally interested and in a sense “economic”, that is, concerned
with the pursuit of profit and acquisition of material and symbolic
resources. “Bourdieu draws from Weber’s sociology of religion to
3 “As arenas of struggle over valued stakes, fields are regulated by a relationship
between supply and demand. This allows the mobilization of notions such as ‘price’
and ‘cost’ in relationship to the strategies ... of agents engaged in competition within
the field ... . [T]he metaphor of the marketplace is a consistent thread throughout his
work” (Jenkins 1992: 86).

--- Page 7 ---
360 hugh b. urban
posit that all action is interested, including symbolic pursuits. He extends
the logic of economic calculation to all goods, material and well as
symbolic” (Swartz 1997: 66).
The key to Bourdieu’s “general science of the economy of prac-
tices” is the central concept of “capital”. In contrast to Marx’s defini-
tion of the term, Bourdieu uses capital to refer not only to economic
wealth, but also to the non-material resources of status, prestige,
valued knowledge, and privileged relationships. In short, it refers to
“all goods, material and symbolic, that present themselves as rare
and worthy of being sought after in a particular social formation”
(Bourdieu 1977: 178). Like economic capital, however, symbolic
capital is not mere wealth that is hoarded and stockpiled; rather, it is
a self-reproducing form of wealth, a kind of “accumulated labor” that
gives its owner “credit” or the ability to appropriate the labor and
products of others. Bourdieu then distinguishes between several vari-
eties of capital: in addition to economic capital, there is social capital
(valued relations with significant others), cultural capital (valued in-
formation or educational qualifications), and symbolic capital (the
other forms of capital when recognized as “legitimate”, in the form of
prestige and honor) (Bourdieu 1986: 252-253; 1987: 34).
Symbolic capital is itself the product of a kind of “social alchemy”,
a process of mis-recognition, through which material capital is trans-
formed and legitimated in the form of status or distinction (Bourdieu
1990a: 129). For mere economic capital must be masked or con-
cealed; otherwise it would reveal the arbitrary nature of the distribu-
tion of wealth in the social hierarchy. When transformed into sym-
bolic capital—in the form of prestige, honor, or nobility—economic
wealth becomes “legitimate”, even “natural”, as a sign not of its
owner’s arbitrary birth and inheritance, but of his innate superiority
(Bourdieu 1994: 75). This is the process at work, for example, in the
purchase of an expensive piece of art, which confers the mark of
“taste” upon its owner, or in the investment in a good education,
which bestows “cultivation” and cultural capital. As such, the dy-
namics of the social field are determined largely by the strategic
maneuvers of agents in their competition for these symbolic re-
sources: “Symbolic capital is the product of a struggle in which each
agent is both a ruthless competitor and supreme judge ... . This
capital can only be defended by a permanent struggle to keep up
with the group above ... and distinguish oneself from the group be-
low” (Bourdieu 1990a: 123). For Bourdieu, it seems, we are all en-

--- Page 8 ---
sacred capital 361
gaged in a fairly brutal game of status, each of us vying over the
scarce resources of prestige and material goods, and none of us ever
truly secure in our own tenuous place in the hierarchy: “social life ...
is a race of all against all” (Dreyfus and Rabinow 1993: 39).
1.4. Sacred capital: Bourdieu on the religious field
Without going so far as to say, with Durkheim, ‘Society is God,’ I would
say: God is never anything other than society. What is expected of God
is only ever obtained from society. which alone has the power to justify
you, to liberate you from facticity, contingency and absurdity ... . The
judgment of others is the last judgment; and social exclusion is the
concrete form of hell and damnation. It is also because man is a God
unto man that man is a wolf unto man. (Bourdieu 1990b:196)
Next to the economic metaphor, the religious metaphor is one of
Bourdieu favorite ways to describe the nature of social practice.
Thus, symbolic capital is the effect of a “transubstantiation” of mere
economic wealth into the seemingly natural qualities of taste and
distinction; the educational system is for the upper classes a “theodicy
of their own privilege”; artistic works are “consecrated” as fine art by
the guardians of high culture, and so on. Bourdieu’s own analysis is
thus intended as a “heretical reading” of culture’s sacred texts that
will “desacralize objects which have become the focus of veneration”,
such as fine art and education (Bourdieu 1984a: 497; see also Fowler
1997: 44). Ironically, however, Bourdieu has written very little spe-
cifically on religion as a distinct field of practice. And the few pieces
he has published—such as “Genesis and structure of the religious
field” (1991) and “Legitimation and structured interests in Weber’s
sociology of religion” (1987a)—do not appear to be his most nuanced
or sophisticated works. Indeed, his tendency toward reductionism
and determinism often seems to get the better of him when he turns
to the religious field, which is for Bourdieu the quintessential form of
misrecognition and symbolic violence.
In principle, Bourdieu’s aim is to apply the same sort of sociologi-
cal critique to the religious sphere that he does to the artistic sphere.
Just as historical sociology aims to “remove the work of art from its
pedestal, where it touches the transcendent”, and to situate it
“through its artistic ancestry and its author’s being in relation to time
and space” (Fowler 1997: 64-65), so too Bourdieu’s analysis would
remove religion from the transcendent, ahistorical sphere and situate
it concretely in culture and social struggle. Like all cultural phenom-

--- Page 9 ---
362 hugh b. urban
ena that claim to be “disinterested” and transcendent, religion is, in
Bourdieu’s eyes, always inherently “interested” and this-worldly
(Bourdieu 1987a: 122). In fact, it would seem that religion is for
Bourdieu the ultimate form of mystification that transforms this-
worldly political and economic interest into allegedly other-worldly
ideals. For it is through religious forms and symbols that arbitrary
social relations are transformed into super-natural relations; through
the divine sanction of religion, a given political arrangement or eco-
nomic system is made to appear “natural”, as if inscribed into the
very fabric of the cosmos. Thus,
The heart of the system of production of religious ideology ... is the
most specific ... principle of ideological alchemy by which the transfigu-
ration of social relations into supernatural relations operates and is
therefore inscribed in the nature of things. (Bourdieu 1991: 5)
In short, Bourdieu wants to extend Max Weber’s work by developing
a “political economy of religion” that would bring out “the full po-
tential of the materialist analysis of religion” (Bourdieu 1990b: 36).
Like other social fields, the religious field is for Bourdieu a com-
petitive marketplace. A fundamentally interested and contested ter-
rain, it is governed by the struggle over material and symbolic re-
sources, specifically over “sacred capital” or the authority to
administer the goods of salvation and to exercise power over the laity
(1991: 22).4 The primary competitors in this struggle are priests and
prophets, who vie for the authority to supply religious goods and
services (grace, forgiveness, salvation, etc.) to their laity-consumers.
While the church and its priests strive for monopoly over the goods of
salvation, through a kind of bureaucratic spiritual hierarchy, the
prophet emerges as a “petty independent entrepreneur of salvation”,
who claims to offer new and improved spiritual products that devalue
the old ones of the traditional church (Bourdieu 1991: 22-24).
The actions of both the priest and prophet, however, rest on a
fundamental misrecognition. For, while their real interests are clearly
this-worldly struggles over material resources and power, these inter-
4 “As a result of their position in the structure of the distribution of capital of
strictly religious authority, the various religious claimants ... can mobilize religious
capital in the competition for the monopoly over the administration of the goods of
salvation and over the legitimate exercise of religious power as power to modify the
relations and practices of lay persons by inculcating in them a religious habitus”
(Bourdieu 1991: 22).

--- Page 10 ---
sacred capital 363
ests are mystified and transubstantiated into other-worldly ideals of a
“spiritual” nature.
Since the very basis of the effect of consecration resides in the fact that
religious ideology and practice fulfill a function of recognition-
misrecognition, religious specialists must necessarily conceal that their
struggles have political interests at stake ... . The symbolic efficacy that
they can wield in these struggles depends on it and therefore they have
a political interest to conceal and have to hide from themselves their
political interests. (Bourdieu 1991: 20)
On the social level, the primary role of the church is to legitimize,
reinforce, and reproduce a given social hierarchy and political forma-
tion: the church gives a divine sanction and legitimacy to the existing
socio-economic system, while at the same time it creates the religious
bureaucracy—the priests, monks, and theologians—necessary to re-
produce it. “In a society divided into classes, the structure of the
systems of religious representations and practices belonging to the
various ... classes contributes to the perpetuation and reproduction of
the social order ... by contributing to its consecration” (Bourdieu
1991: 19). Because of its general monopoly on sacred capital, the
church and its priests have the power to impose a specifically reli-
gious habitus upon the laity. Through a wide array of “spiritual exer-
cises”, from prayer and rosaries to sacraments, from bodily disci-
plines such as genuflection and kneeling to modes of dress and sexual
conduct, the church has the power to inscribe and thereby reproduce
the social structure upon the individual body (1987a: 126).5
The prophet, on the other hand, emerges as the radical voice of
challenge to the existing social and symbolic order, offering a revolu-
tionary vision for an eschatological destruction and re-creation of the
ways things are. Calling for apocalyptic death and renewal of the
cosmos, the prophet implicitly challenges the sociocosm and the sa-
cred authorities that support it. And yet, for Bourdieu, the prophetic
call to revolution is always a flawed and failed one. Bound, as he or
she is, by the symbolic forms of religious tradition, the prophet can-
not recognize the truly political nature of his or her own revolt, and
5 “Competition for religious power owes its specificity ... to the fact that what is at
stake is the monopoly of the legitimate exercise of the power to modify ... the
practice and world of lay people, by imposing on and inculcating in them a particu-
lar religious habitus. By this I mean a lasting, generalized and transposable disposi-
tion to act and think in conformity with the principles of a (quasi) systematic view of
the world” (Bourdieu 1987a: 126).

--- Page 11 ---
364 hugh b. urban
so falls prey to the “flight of thought” into mysticism, symbolism, and
prophetic dream, rather than working actively toward real material
change (Bourdieu 1991: 37-38).
In sum, Bourdieu proposes to offer a more sophisticated interpre-
tation of religion, one that would move beyond a simple Marxist
reduction of the sacred to the material sphere, and offer more insight
into the specifically symbolic dimension of the religious field. Yet, he
seems to have finally given us a rather pessimistic and static view of
religion. It is a model that offers little active role to ordinary lay-
people, who are largely portrayed as passive consumers of the goods
purveyed by spiritual bureaucrats and entrepreneurs; and it is one
that offers little hope that religion might be used not simply to repro-
duce, but also to change or transform the existing socio-political
order.
1.5. The mirror of reproduction: Problems and criticisms of Bourdieu
A whole set of presuppositions is being imposed as self-evident: it is
taken for granted that maximum growth and therefore productivity and
competitiveness, as the ultimate and soul goal of human actions or that
economic forces cannot be resisted. (Bourdieu 1998: 30-31)
[Bourdieu] consistently says he is doing one thing while actually doing
something else (and usually something which negates or undermines his
stated project). (Jenkins 1992: 175)
Bourdieu’s analysis of religion is an especially good example of many
of the basic problems that run through his approach to culture as a
whole. Over the last two decades, a variety of powerful objections
have been raised against his work and his view of social action, some
of them rather superficial, and some of them quite profound.
The most common criticism of Bourdieu is that, despite his claims
to avoid the errors of structuralism and his emphasis on the strategic
nature of social action, his view of society still seems overwhelmingly
top-heavy and deterministic. While he does an excellent job of exam-
ining the process of reproduction in society, the ways in which exist-
ing class formations and political hierarchies are maintained, he
seems much less able to account for transformation and change in the face
of real historical events. Hence, many critics argue that Bourdieu
tends to reduce social actors to unconscious “dupes” within a rather
static structural system, and hence to reduce social practice to a
“celebration of mindless conformity”, which merely reproduces the

--- Page 12 ---
sacred capital 365
existing social order (Jenkins 1992: 97). “The role of consciousness is
almost totally eclipsed; his actors seem doomed to reproduce their
world mindlessly without its contradictions leaving any mark on their
awareness” (Comaroff: 1985: 5).6 Above all, as Fowler comments,
Bourdieu tends toward a deeply pessimistic and neo-Machiavellian
view of society, which leaves little room for any kind of genuine
revolution or lasting resistance against the reproduction of social
domination (Fowler 1997: 5, 177). This is particularly clear in his
analysis of religion, which offers no real agency to the ordinary lay-
consumers in the religious marketplace and no real hope that reli-
gious forms could be used to stimulate change, rebellion, or revolu-
tion against the status quo.
Now, both Bourdieu and his defenders have countered that this is
not a fair criticism. For throughout his work, Bourdieu emphasizes
the inventive, strategic nature of action, embodied in the habitus,
which is never deterministically closed, but always open to change
(Swartz 1997: 212). Moreover, it is not true that Bourdieu denies the
possibility of resistance; indeed, in his later work, he makes a power-
ful call for resistance against the tyranny of the market. Rather, he is
simply not very optimistic about it, observing that reproduction is in
most cases far more common than revolution. More important, he is
also suspicious of naive claims to resistance and the to “misplaced
belief in illusory freedoms” that are in fact more subtle forms of
domination (Bourdieu 1990b: 15). But in any case, the question of
resistance does seem to be one of the least well-developed aspects of
his work.
While the charge that Bourdieu is deterministic and top-heavy is
perhaps not entirely justified, there is a more serious problem with his
work, namely his fundamentally economic view of human action. Ironi-
cally, Bourdieu had originally proposed his own model largely as a
counter to rigid Marxism or “vulgar economism”. For Bourdieu, the
economic realm is itself but one of many “fields” in the social order,
alongside the political, religious, or artistic, each of which have their
6 As de Certeau argues, Bourdieu’s concept of strategy remains oddly limited. For
Bourdieu, strategies are largely unconscious and not subject to intentional calcula-
tion; they are “the capacity for rule governed improvisation” that goes on beneath
the surface of conscious agency. Thus de Certeau concludes, “there is no choice
among several possibilities, and thus no strategic intention ... there is only an as-
sumed world as the repetition of the past ... Docta ignorantia, therefore, a cleverness
that does not recognize itself as such” (1984: 56).

--- Page 13 ---
366 hugh b. urban
own laws of exchange and forms of capital (Bourdieu 1984b: 5). And
in his later work, he is severely critical of economic reductionism or
the view that economic action is the end of all human existence
(Bourdieu 1998: 30-31). Yet ironically, Bourdieu himself uses a fun-
damentally economic metaphor to describe all human action in all its
many fields. We are, for Bourdieu, essentially interested, acquisitive,
competitive creatures, each of us struggling for the accumulation of
capital in order to secure an optimal position within the social hierar-
chy. As a variety of critics point out, this seems to be a remarkably
bleak and cynical view of human nature, as well as in contradiction
with his own critique of classical Marxism and economic
reductionism (Gartman 1991: 421-427; Honneth 1986: 55-66). As
Caillé argues, Bourdieu reduces social practice to a “hidden game of
material interests” in which all action is reducible to a fundamental
drive to pursue interests and accumulate power (Caillé 1992: 109-
111).
There is a certain irony in Bourdieu’s economy of practices: though
sharply critical of reductionist forms of Marxism for not according suf-
ficient importance to the symbolic dimension of social life, Bourdieu’s
own view of action offers a more thoroughly materialist account than
the forms of Marxism it so sharply criticizes. (Swartz 1997: 72)7
In fact, some critics argue that by viewing all social action as interested
and concerned with profit Bourdieu ironically “turns everyone into a
capitalist” (Karabel and Halsey 1977: 13).
Here I would suggest much the same critique of Bourdieu that
Jean Baudrillard has made of Marx’s work. As Baudrillard argues in
his Mirror of Production (1975), Marx’s critique of capitalism, as brilliant
as it is, bears with it a tragic flaw: for while it attacks the capitalist
reduction of human beings to exploited laborers slaving under an
unjust economic system, Marxism only reinforces and naturalizes the
view of human beings defined in economic terms. Though it is a
powerful inversion of capitalism, it remains bound to an extremely
reductive one of the human being as homo faber, a laborer, who is
defined primarily in terms of his economic production. In this sense,
7 In his work on the class system in India, Murray Milner (1994: 11) argues that
Bourdieu makes the mistake of reducing all “capital” ultimately to material or eco-
nomic capital. In so doing he leaves out the possibility that people might seek
nonmaterial forms of capital, such as honor, sacredness, aesthetic taste, etc., not as
disguised ways to attain economic capital, but as ends in themselves.

--- Page 14 ---
sacred capital 367
Baudrillard argues, Marxism is imperialistic, insofar as it imposes its
view of human being as producer onto all other cultures and defines
them in terms of economic development (Baudrillard 1988: 113-115).
Or, in other critics’ words:
The Marxist model ... tyrannizes earlier or future societies because it
absorbs them into its own likeness. The Marxist sign of production
extends to the world. History equals the history of the modes of produc-
tion. Marxism thus becomes imperialistic. All societies have to account
for themselves in relation to the productivist model. (Horrocks and
Jevtic 1999: 73)
Rather than impose a Marxist economic model onto the rest of the
world, Baudrillard suggests that we use other cultures to critique and
rethink this totalizing model itself. “Instead of exporting Marxism ...
we [should] bring all the force and questioning of primitive societies
to bear on Marxism ... . Perhaps then we will break this ... self-
fetishization of Western thought” (Baudrillard 1988: 115).
So too, Bourdieu’s “political economy of social action” should be
subjected to a similar kind of critique—what we might call a critique
of Bourdieu’s “mirror of reproduction”. In a sense, Bourdieu’s model is
even more problematic than Marx’s, because Bourdieu has turned us
all not simply into laborers, but into capitalists, self-interested beings
who seek to accumulate and maximize our own symbolic and eco-
nomic capital. At the same time, he has also extended this “capital-
ist” model beyond the material realm to the symbolic, cultural, and
religious realms, so that, in effect, all action at every level becomes capitalist.
Hence, following Baudrillard’s critique of Marx, I would suggest that
we need to stop imposing these kinds of economic models onto other
cultures; instead, it might be more useful to bring the “force and
questioning” of non-Western cultures onto this economic model it-
self. With a view to this end, I now turn to the case of the Bˆuls.
2. The marketplace of the world and the bazaar of love: Bodily practice and sacred
capital in the Bˆul songs of Bengal
You’ve come into this world, but you don’t know the value of money
[«ˆkˆ]
Money is such a thing that it’s virtually equal to Allah himself!
You will not find any sort of scale of measure like money in this uni-
verse. ...
If I go to a holy man, I find that he too has money.

--- Page 15 ---
368 hugh b. urban
No one pays any respect to those who have no money.
And those who have thousands of rupees become king.
Even a murderer goes unpunished if he has enough money! (Bˆul 1970:
13)
Now that I have briefly outlined a few of Bourdieu’s key ideas and
their potential uses in the study of religion, let me apply them in one
particular case with which I have some extensive first-hand experi-
ence—the Bˆuls of Bengal.8 Although the historical origins of the
Bˆuls are shrouded in mystery—with some scholars dating them
back to the sixteenth century (Bha««ˆcˆrya 1981) and others tracing
their origins to the much more recent period of the late nineteenth
century (Urban 1999)—it seems clear that the Bˆul tradition reached
its height of popularity during the colonial era, toward the end of the
nineteenth century. Although the term Bˆul appears occasionally in
some early texts, such as the sixteenth-century Caitanya Caritˆmäta, the
earliest known reference to a distinct sect called “Bˆuls” is not until
1870 (Datta 1987: 232; Salomon 1995; Urban 1999).9 Today, the
most famous poet in the Bˆul tradition, and surely one of the most
popular of all Bengali folk heroes, is Lˆlan Sˆin or Lˆlan Fakir (1774-
1890). Having composed over 300 songs, Lˆlan is said to have died at
the age of 116, and has since become something of a national hero.
Particularly through the influence of Rabindranath Tagore, who
used Lˆlan’s music to compose India’s national anthem, the Bˆuls
have become a kind of a “folk icon” (Capwell 1986: 20).
From their origins, the Bˆuls have held a profoundly ambivalent
place in the Bengali imagination. They are, on one hand, beloved for
8 There is much debate over the etymological origins of the term “Bˆul”. The
most common view is that it derives from the Sanskrit term vˆtula or vyˆkula meaning
mad or upset; there is also a Hindi variant, Baura. Others, however, think it is from
the Persian word ˆul. The first use of the term appears in the K§Èavijaya of ¥r“
Mˆlˆdhˆra Basu, to mean a “carefree and disheveled nature”; it also appears in the
Caitanya Caritˆmta, in which Caitanya is called Bˆul or mad with love (Bhaˆcˆrya
1981: 1-3). For collections of Bˆul songs, see Jhˆ 1995; Dˆs and Mahˆpˆtra 1958;
Mansur Udd“n 1942. Among the large body of secondary literature on the Bˆuls, see
Bha««ˆcˆrya 1981; Openshaw 1997; Dimock 1968; Capwell 1986; Salomon 1991,
1995; Urban 1999.
9 Openshaw argues that the term Bˆul is now so misused and problematic as to be
worthless as a scholarly category: “Due to varied appropriations ... the word has no
analytical value from a sociological point of view ... and is at times positively mislead-
ing” (1997: 297). Instead, Openshaw uses the Bengali phrase barttamˆn panth“, that is,
those who follow the path of barttamˆn, or what can be ascertained directly through
senses, rather than through mere hearsay or inference.

--- Page 16 ---
sacred capital 369
their haunting, beautiful music and romanticized as embodiments of
the free, unfettered spirit of Bengali folk culture. Yet, on the other
hand, the Bˆuls have long been suspected and persecuted for their
alleged immorality, sexual promiscuity, and use of intoxicants. Dur-
ing the height of Muslim fundamentalism in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, the Bˆuls were attacked and beaten as cor-
ruptions of genuine Islamic tradition and adulterous minglings of
Hindu and Muslim cultures (Salomon 1995: 268; Urban 1999).
A large part of the reason for the Bˆuls’ ambivalent place in the
Bengali imagination is their controversial social vision. Drawn prima-
rily from the poorer lower classes of rural Bengal, the Bˆul tradition
offers both a strong critique of the class system and a spiritual path
for marginalized groups on the fringes of society. “Socially the Bˆul
tradition can be interpreted as a series of rebellions by isolated indi-
vidualists against caste and class system” (Bhattacharya 1978: 30).
The Bˆuls typically reject conventional social and religious institu-
tions, claiming to be neither Hindu nor Muslim, though eclectically
drawing both from Hindu Tantric and from Muslim Sufi traditions
alike. A homeless wanderer and self-proclaimed outcast, the Bˆul
owns nothing but a simple patch-work coat, his long hair bound in a
top-knot, carrying with him only his singled-stringed instrument, the
ekara. Ignoring basic social conventions and taking delight in over-
turning the laws of mainstream religion, the Bˆul is an openly icono-
clastic figure. “A Bˆul is one who, dressed in a tattered garment
made of remnants of clothing ... of both Hindus and Muslims, wan-
ders incessantly living on whatever those who listen to his songs give
him ... . The Bˆul is thought mad because he goes deliberately ...
against the current of custom” (Dimock 1966: 251). Willfully inhab-
iting the “topsy-turvy land” (ul«a de²), the Bˆul may violate any social
convention for the sake of spiritual love. “Reverse are the modes and
manners of the man who ... is a lover of true love; none is sure about
the how and when of his behavior ... Awkwardly wild are his man-
ners and customs ... . He is as satisfied with mud as with sandal-paste
... . He builds his house in the sky, even as the fourteen worlds are
burnt to ashes” (Dasgupta 1968: 163). God, for the Bˆul, is found not
in temples or mosques, but within the individual human being, where
ee dwells in the most intimate form of the Man of the Heart (maner
mˆÈus). Hence the most direct means to realizing the divine lies not in
outward ritual or institutional ceremony, but rather through physical

--- Page 17 ---
370 hugh b. urban
practice, journeying inward to discover the maner mˆÈus who lies hid-
den within every heart (see Jhˆ 1995: song 340; Salomon 1995).
2.1. Bodies of ecstasy: Refashioning the body and the habitus in Bˆul practice
Explore the nature
of your own body,
My unfeeling heart
Unless you know
Your very substance
Worshipping God
is of no avail. – Song of Radhashyam (Bhattacharya 1978: 110)
Much of the Bˆuls’ spiritual practice centers around the human body
(deha). For the Bˆuls, as for other mystical traditions of Bengal, the
human body is considered to be the supreme locus of the Absolute
Reality and the supreme vehicle to liberation. Imagined as a micro-
cosm, a mirror of the universe in physical form, the body contains its
own vast “interior landscape”, complete with all the heavens, hells,
mountains, rivers, and gods. According to a song of Radhashyam,
“The body is the dome, Of the seven heavens, The nether-world,
And the earth we live in” (Bhattacharya 1978: 110). Yet at the same
time, in Bourdieu’s terms, the body is also very much a sociocosm or
embodiment of the social organism, inscribed with the structures and
forms of the culture in which it is embedded.
In Bengal, as in most of India, there is a deep and intimate rela-
tionship between the individual body and the larger social body. As
Partha Chatterjee observes, caste and class are themselves fundamen-
tally “bodily” phenomena: “Caste attaches itself to the body, not the
soul” (1993: 194). As Ronald Inden and Ralph Nicholas have shown,
Bengali society is traditionally imagined in the form of a physical
organism, which is held together by bonds of love and common
bodily substances, shared between individual bodies. Through the
ten sa‡skˆras, the sacraments or “life-cycle rites” (marriage, first im-
pregnation, baptism, initiation, etc.), each individual body is progres-
sively transformed and assimilated into the greater totality of the
social body. One’s bodily substance, in short, determines one’s rank
and status within the social hierarchy. Through the sa‡skˆras, the
fluids and substances of the individual body are transformed in order
to unite it with the greater body of the community. “Every sa‡skˆra is
a transformative action that refines and purifies the body, initiating it
into new statuses and relationships by giving it a new birth” (Inden

--- Page 18 ---
sacred capital 371
and Nicholas 1987: 37). In Bourdieu’s terms, we would say that the
sa‡skˆras serve to inscribe the larger structures of the social order
onto the human body, literally incorporating them, in the form of the
habitus, into the physical nature and deportment of the individual.
The most important of the sa‡skˆras—particularly marriage
(vivˆha), first impregnation (garbhˆdhˆna), and procreating a son
(pu‡savana)—center primarily around the bodily fluids such as semen,
menstrual fluid, milk, and blood, substances which are manipulated
in order to construct a socialized bodily identity. Vivˆha, in particular,
is the most important means of defining caste and rank in Bengali
culture, for it ensures the proper union of individual bodies within
the greater social order (Inden and Nicholas 1987: 23). When joined
in marriage, the male and female are believed to share the same
bodily fluids, the same blood, tears, and sexual fluids. Therefore, an
improper marriage threatens the whole delicate balance of the social
hierarchy, bearing “the capacity to ruin the entire order of jatis in the
community ... . The improper combination of coded bodily sub-
stances entailed the improper combination of worship and occupa-
tional substances as well” (Inden and Nicholas 1987: 52).
The second and third sa‡skˆras also center around bodily fluids,
though now in relation to procreation and the hope for a male child.
Both sacraments use fluid-symbolism in order to influence the con-
ception of the fetus, hoping to alter its composition and to determine
its gender. According to traditional Bengali beliefs, a child is created
by the mingling of blood and seed in the womb, a predominance of
male seed producing a boy and a predominance of female blood
producing a girl. Thus, the second and third sa‡skˆras work upon
these fluids in the hope of influencing their flow and ensuring the
birth of a male child. In the rite of first impregnation, for example,
the husband touches his wife’s navel and gives her a drink from the
five products of the cow. So too, during the rite of procreating a son,
the wife must drink symbolic “seminal foods”, such as yogurt with
lentils and barley seeds, in order to “increase the seminal portion of
her child”. The birth of a healthy male child is thus crucial to the
social order, for it is the physical embodiment of the union of hus-
band and wife and “concretely embodies their one body relation-
ship” (Inden and Nicholas 1987: 52-54).
As Glen A. Hayes has shown, many of the esoteric traditions of
Bengal, such as the Bˆuls and Sahajiyˆs, also developed a series of
rituals that work upon the fluids and processes of the individual

--- Page 19 ---
372 hugh b. urban
body—perhaps what we might call a series of “alternative sacra-
ments” or esoteric sa‡skˆras. Like the conventional Hindu sa‡skˆras,
the Bˆul and Sahajiyˆ rituals work upon the substances of the body
in order to reform it and reintegrate within a greater community or
family, that of the guru and the lineage of the esoteric tradition. Yet,
these alternative sacraments are designed to create not a conven-
tional social body but, rather, an alternative, spiritualized, and
divinized body, the siddha-deha or aprakäta deha (Hayes 337; cf. Urban
1995, 2001).
Going beyond Hayes, however, I would argue that esoteric sects
such as the Sahajiyˆs and Bˆuls do not simply adapt the traditional
sa‡skˆras passively and unreflectively; rather, they intentionally ma-
nipulate and transform them, often inverting them, in order to create an
alternative self and social body. By no means passive blocks of wood
inscribed with the larger structures of the social body, as Bourdieu’s
model of the habitus might suggest, the Bˆuls in fact manipulate the
individual body in order to reject the conventional social order itself.
For, as Comaroff suggests in her study of body-symbolism in the
South African Zionist movement, human beings are not simply con-
demned to reproduce the values of the dominant social body; rather,
“the human imagination is independently reflective and exists in a
dialectical relationship with the very ... forms which give it life”
(Comaroff 1985: 79). Thus, if the substances of the body can serve as
the basic symbols of the social order, these same substances can also
be manipulated by dissident groups in order to challenge or subvert
the social order. This is nowhere more apparent than in the case of
the Bˆuls, who aim to achieve not only a new bodily identity, but also
a new communal identity. Their “alternative sacraments” do not
seek to create a socialized body and habitus, incorporated into the
conventional economic order. On the contrary, they aim to deconstruct
the conventional social body, creating in its place a new secret body,
with a reformed habitus, liberated from the dominant world of caste
and labor.
Many of the Bˆuls’ practices, in fact, involve deliberate transgres-
sions and systematic inversions of the categories that define the con-
ventional social order. While the ordinary Bengali is incorporated
into the social body through the ritual manipulation of physical sub-
stances, the Bˆul often manipulates these same substances in radi-
cally transgressive ways in order to transcend the conventional social
order itself. One of the most infamous of Bˆul practices, for example,

--- Page 20 ---
sacred capital 373
is known as the “Four Moons” (cˆri-candra), which involves the literal
(not symbolic) consumption of four bodily substances: semen, men-
strual blood, urine, and feces. Imagined as analogs to the four ele-
ments, these four substances represent the substance of the universe
itself, and the consumption of them thereby reintegrates the Bˆul into
the Supreme Reality (Salomon 1995: 196; Jha 1995: 65-108). “Blood
(²onit) semen (²ukra), feces and urine—these four come from the fa-
ther’s seed and the mother’s womb. Therefore one should take these
back into the body, rather than allowing them to go to waste” (Datta
1987: 232). From the orthodox Hindu standpoint, this is surely the
height of impurity, which would normally render the individual pol-
luted in the most extreme way. Yet for the Bˆuls, this systematic
violation of the laws of purity and impurity is the most powerful sign
that they have transcended the conventional social order. They have
“overcome aversion, shame and fear” and so attained “the stage of
non-duality and non-discrimination” (Datta 1987: 94). In sum, the
consumption of these polluting substances is an extreme, but sym-
bolically powerful means of breaking down the normal socialized
habitus and opening the possibility for birth into an alternative social
body.
Even more extreme forms of transgression take place in the Bˆuls’
esoteric sexual rituals. Largely adapted from older tantric traditions
of Bengal, Bˆul practice involves a ritual form of intercourse that in
many ways deliberately reverses the normal flow of bodily fluids and
normal relations between the sexes. According to the Bˆuls’ view of
the human body, the Supreme Self or “Man of the Heart” (maner
mˆÈus) dwells in the top of the head, resting in the highest energy
center which is imagined as a radiant thousand-petalled lotus
(sahasrˆr). During the three days of a woman’s menstrual period, the
Supreme Self descends from the top of the head to the lowest energy
center called the m(cid:157)lˆdhˆr, the meeting place of the three rivers
(triveÈ“), where the Supreme Self appears in the flow of menstrual
blood. This is the optimum time for Bˆul sexual practice. For the aim
of Bˆul practice is to unite with the female and then to “catch” the
Supreme Self by separating him out from the menstrual blood and
then drawing him back up through the penis into the male body.
Once this divine “fish” has been caught within the waters of the
triveÈ“, the Supreme Self must be drawn upward “against the current”
through the male’s body until he is rejoined with the thousand-pet-
alled lotus at the top of the head. The resulting bliss is known as

--- Page 21 ---
374 hugh b. urban
“catching the Uncatchable, catching the thief or being dead while
alive” (Salomon 1995: 195-196). All of this, moreover, is explicitly
described as an inverted form of sexual union, one that goes in the
contrary direction, against the current, and so leads not to normal
domestic life in society, but to supreme liberation from society and
the world of rebirth. The result is not the birth of an ordinary child,
as a symbol of the union of male and female in accordance with the
traditional sa‡skˆras and the fulfillment of their obligations to society;
rather, it is the birth of a new non-material body or perfected body
(siddha deha), which is neither male nor female, but both, combined in
immortal, androgynous bliss. Thus, Lˆlan Fakir sings,
As the man and woman in me
Unite in love
The brilliance of beauty
Balanced on the bi-petalled
Lotus in me
dazzles my eyes ...
My skin and bone
are turned to gold.
I am the reservoir of love. (Bhattacharya 1978: 88-89)
Ultimately, by engaging in these alternative sacraments the Bˆul is
incorporated into a wholly new social body. The Bˆul becomes part
of a very different social order, one governed not by class or wealth,
but by the rejection of the conventional social body. Reborn into a
new family, with a new father or mother (the guru) and siblings (guru-
bhˆis and guru-bons), the Bˆuls who practice these “spiritual disci-
plines” have effectively deconstructed and reconstructed their own
habitus, removing themselves from the mainstream social body and
incorporating themselves into an alternative social organism with its
own unique habitus. And this also means removing themselves from
the dominant social “marketplace” and engaging in the business of a
new spiritual market.
2.2. The marketplace of the world and the bazaar of love: Economic metaphors
and mercantile discourse in the Bˆul songs
Where did you get your scriptures, sacred texts, Veda and Purˆa?
Seduced by hearsay and inference,
you keep worshipping and meditating
While the guru revels in the upturn in his business. – Bˆul song of MaÈi
(Openshaw 1997: 303)

--- Page 22 ---
sacred capital 375
One of the most common metaphors used throughout the Bˆul songs
—and throughout Bengali popular literature as a whole, in fact—is
the image of the marketplace or bazaar (hˆ« or bˆjˆr). Not unlike
Bourdieu, the Bˆuls typically describe the world of society, human
interaction, and even religious life as a vast competitive marketplace,
a realm of buying and selling, haggling, cheating, and thievery. Yet,
in contrast to Bourdieu’s model, which portrays the laity primarily as
passive consumers with little agency in the religious marketplace, the
Bˆul songs show us clearly that ordinary men and women can also
appropriate the forms of spiritual marketplace, often in quite subver-
sive and deviant ways. Indeed, they often invert and deform the
image of the market into a powerful source of indigenous critique of
the dominant religious and social order.
Whether in the form of the bˆjˆr (the permanent market for gen-
eral merchandise), the hˆ« (the local occasional market), the gañj (the
wholesale market for bulk goods), or the melˆ (the annual fair), the
world of the market has long held a central role as both a material
locus and a key metaphor in the Bengali imagination (Sen 1998). As
Sudipta Sen suggests, the marketplace of eighteenth- and nineteenth-
century Bengal was the nexus in a complex web of relations that
permeated all levels of culture, a meeting point of economic forces,
political power, and religious patronage. Amidst a dispersed and
shifting political realm, it was the marketplace that bound together
the many diverse fields of power, economic, religious, and political
alike. “The marketplace ... was not just a site of transaction, but a
knot in the fabric of social mediation” (Sen 1996: 19).
Not only were there intimate connections between political power
and control of the market, but there was an equally close relationship
between religious patronage and the bazaar. The marketplace shows
us just how difficult it is to separate the economic and religious fields,
how material, social, and religious capital are all bound together in a
complex fabric (Sen 1996: 26). Thus we find that throughout the
literature of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Bengal, the image of
the marketplace often serves as the most basic image for the world as
a whole—a fitting symbol for the complex exchanges within a highly
mobile, fluid, transient society. Not only in travel literature and secu-
lar accounts, but also in religious texts, the market represents the
knot in a fabric of political, religious, and economic relations, and
thus a key symbol for power as a whole. “The marketplace stood as

--- Page 23 ---
376 hugh b. urban
a powerful metaphor of worldly authority for the ruling elite” (Sen
1996: 30-31).
Yet, simultaneously, the image of the marketplace could also be-
come a potential source of subversion and critique. As Mikhail
Bakhtin suggests, the marketplace holds a unique place in most cul-
tures: as a realm of social interaction that transcends most ordinary
social barriers, it brings together men and women of all classes in a
common sphere of exchange, allowing an unusual freedom to speak
frankly and critically.
The marketplace ... was a world unto itself ... . [A]ll performances in
this area, from loud cursing to organized show ... were imbued with the
same atmosphere of freedom, frankness and familiarity ... . The market-
place was the center of all that is unofficial: it enjoyed a certain extra-
territoriality in a world of official order and ideology. (Bakhtin 1984:
153-154)
So too, as Guha has shown in his study of peasant resistance in
colonial Bengal, the marketplace was a special site of critique, a
realm where the lower classes could speak out against the wealthy
upper classes. Because it is a place “where people gather en masse for
trade and entertainment”, the marketplace always represented a po-
tential threat to the ruling powers: “the bazaar was clearly identified
in colonialist thinking with the origin and dissemination of rumor
and subversive discourse among the lower classes” (Guha 1983: 258).
This ambivalent status of the marketplace, as both a center of
power and as a potential site of contestation and critique, also holds
true on the religious plane. Not only was the marketplace a key
metaphor for political dominance, but often it was also used as a
metaphor for religious dominance and spiritual authority. One of the
most remarkable uses of the market metaphor appears in a work
attributed to the poet Narottam Dˆs, a poem entitled Hˆ« Pattan
(“The foundation of the marketplace”). Here the great Bengali saint,
¥r“ Caitanya, is transformed into a kind of holy businessman who
founded the spiritual marketplace of the Vai§Èava tradition in order
to distribute the commodities of love, song, and prayer throughout
the world:
A market and post were set up by the quay,
and the flag went up, a warning to the sinful.
Storehouses of four rasas in every direction,
secured all around with the name of Hari.
Guards sat chanting and chanting that name.
One could buy or sell in this market at will. (trans. Sen 1996: 31)

--- Page 24 ---
sacred capital 377
Caitanya’s chief disciples are then appointed as the various agents,
clerks, and brokers of this market; and the host of devotees flocking to
the holy bazaar become the merchants and traders, selling their di-
vine merchandise of songs in praise of Kä§Èa.
The image of the marketplace, however, could also be given a far
more critical and edge; indeed, it could also be used by lower-class
heterodox or so-called “deviant sects” as a very negative and critical
image. As Sen points out, the songs of these deviant sects often sub-
vert the image of the “official marketplace”, cynically depicting it as
a world of illusion and suffering, a realm of thieving, chicanery and
greed: “[I]n the songs of other sects—particularly ones that question
or subvert kingly rule or prescribed religious leadership—the market-
place appears as a classic metaphor for material illusion in mortal
life” (Sen 1996: 32).
2.3. Thievery in the bazaar of love: Mercantile imagery in the Bˆul songs
The bazaar has been controlled.
Oil is under control, sugar is under control,
the government has controlled humans as well!
Meat is ten rupees a kilo, fish is almost twelve, grains not less than six.
Seeing eggs at eighty paise a pair,
the Brahmin has started to keep poultry! – contemporary Bˆul song
(Bhattacharya 1978: song 9)
Nowhere is this critical use of marketplace imagery more prominent
than in the songs of the Bˆuls. Like the earlier Vai§Èava traditions,
the Bˆuls make frequent use of the imagery of the marketplace: buy-
ing and selling, moneylenders and brokers, bankers and thieves. Yet,
they do so in a far more critical sense that in many ways subverts that
of mainstream religious and social institutions. For the Bˆuls, the
image of the market functions on two levels simultaneously, on both
a practical socio-economic level and on a symbolic religious level. In
its more concrete economic sense, the image of the “bazaar of the
world” (bhava-bajˆr) has very direct implications, describing the actual
lives of men and women laboring in colonial Bengal. It serves as a
critical commentary upon the lives of the poor lower orders of the
slums and bazaars of the cities. In the words of Lˆlan:
When you deal in the market of the world,
you think you buy rich rubies, diamonds, pearls—
you really only buy brass beads, my friend. ...

--- Page 25 ---
378 hugh b. urban
“My house,” “my goods”—like this our days go echoing by.
We eat the poison of our possessions, and when wealth is lost we weep.
What good will weeping do when lost, my brother? (Bha««ˆcˆrya 1981:
song 63)
Often, the Bˆuls appropriate the earlier Vai§Èava image of Cai-
tanya’s “marketplace of love”, though giving it a far more pessimistic
and negative interpretation. As we see in the following song of
Lˆlan’s, the story of the rich merchant who hopes to trade in the
marketplace of love becomes the story of the deluded soul who
squanders his life in the pursuit of false hopes and vain illusions.
You brought the merchant’s treasure here
and squandered it, you Madman!
For what you owe, you’ll go down to death’s kingdom. ...
The Creator, that Wealthy Merchant,
who stocks all sorts of precious jewels, had mercy on you.
But, now you’ve lost that treasure, O my mind, ... .
You came to the market of bliss, saying, “I’ll engage in trade,”
but now you’re flat broke. (Jhˆ 1995: song 219)
As ¥aktinath Jhˆ suggests, the Bˆuls often use the imagery of the
bazaar and the sorrows of the poor Bengali merchant to describe the
sad fate of those who seek happiness in the material world. Just as so
many petty shopkeepers of the colonial era were reduced to abject
poverty when the British capitalists and wealthy moneylenders took
control of the market, so too the human soul wanders in the endless
debt and poverty of this mortal realm of sa‡sˆra:
The East India Company monopolized control over business in this era,
and many small merchants had to take loans from Moneylenders or
businessmen, then lost their wealth and fell into poverty ... . The meta-
phor of the wealth of small merchants becoming exhausted appears
many times in these songs ... . Because of thievery or disasters, the small
merchants fell into poverty ... . The Fakir religion is their last refuge
(Jhˆ 1995: 218).
Yet, at the same time, the Bˆuls are clearly using the market
metaphor as a weapon not just of social critique, but also of religious
critique, as a means of reflecting upon and making fun of the domi-
nant spiritual institutions of Hinduism and Islam. The songs are filled
with often humorous, at times scathing, attacks on the hypocrisy of
the religious life around them—the useless mumbo-jumbo and chi-
canery that fills the temples and mosques, but only obscures the true
presence of the divine within the human heart (Dimock 1966: 263).

--- Page 26 ---
sacred capital 379
Thus, all the conventional rituals, pilgrimages, and saint-cults are so
many devious schemes within the spiritual market. They benefit only
the greedy merchants, namely, the lazy Brahmins and Mullahs who
profit in this spiritual trade.
What business can be done from image worship in this Bengal!
No other place has [such] worship, it’s [just] a waste of money ....
How much money is spent at all these pilgrimage centers in India.
How cunningly the priest-touts come like gurus with [lists of] names
and places
So many people in this country are starving.
But in their case [the priests/ gurus] money is forked out. (Openshaw
1997: 306)
Instead, the Bˆuls seek an alternative kind of spiritual marketplace.
The Bˆul wanders in search of the merchant’s shop that lies beyond
caste and religious distinctions, where Muslims, Hindus, and Chris-
tians all share together in the same sweets of divine love. This is a
shop where money is useless and only compassion is of value.
I am impatiently searching the
the simple address
of that particular shop
where Allah, Hari, Ram, Kali, God
take meals from the common plate ...
where knowledge-posset and duty sugar
are being dabbed by Buddha and Nanak
where by dint of kindness and forgiveness
the religion-based sweets develop
These can’t be purchased through payment of money
Whereas these can be eaten without any payment
The proper way of knowing the whereabouts of the real owner
can be known through meditation and prayer. (Sarkar 1990: 179)
The true wealth or “capital” that he seeks here is neither the eco-
nomic capital of the moneylenders nor the “sacred capital” of the
Brahmins and Shaykhs; rather, it is the most intimate treasure of the
“Man of the Heart”, that true wealth that is the presence of the
divine within every human body (see Mansur Udd“n 1942: song 3).
Indeed, we might say that the Bˆuls are not seeking a form of “sacred
capital” in Bourdieu’s sense, but almost a kind of “anti-capital”, for
they value poverty and humility in place of economic wealth, self-
abnegation in place of self-interest or personal profit.
With a beggar’s humility
I have come to your doors,

--- Page 27 ---
380 hugh b. urban
O benign bearer of pains
No one is ever turned away
from your home of unending stores.
You have all the riches
In the worlds of god, demon and man
And of much have you given
Without my demand
No more do I need any wealth
O my master, Give me your feet. (Bhattacharya 1978: 104)
In sum, the Bˆuls’ use of the market metaphor serves as a clever
double-bladed weapon. On one hand, it really does describe the
unhappy lives of many poor men and women, living in the slums and
bazaars, with their dreams of a new, liberated marketplace free of
thieving brokers or treacherous moneylenders. On the other hand, it
also serves to criticize mainstream religious institutions, while offering
the vision of an alternative spiritual marketplace: the love-bazaar of
the Bˆul path.
In marked contrast to Bourdieu, the Bˆul songs show us that ordi-
nary consumers in the spiritual marketplace are far from passive
followers of monopolizing priests or entrepreneurial prophets; rather,
they are both aware of and critically reflective upon the dominant
social and religious institutions around them. Still more strikingly,
they are also able to appropriate and subvert the very metaphor of
the “marketplace” itself. In the Bˆul songs, the image of the bazaar
becomes simultaneously a weapon to attack the futility of the domi-
nant social and religious structures around them and a way to imag-
ine a more egalitarian other-world, a bazaar of love, that transcends
the greedy hypocrisy of the bazaar of the world.
I would suggest, therefore, that we follow the lead of Michel de
Certeau by building on Bourdieu’s notion of strategy and by more
fully developing the possibilities for struggle and change. We need to
ask, in short, how do lower-class, marginalized members of society
struggle to achieve capital or power? How do the poor “make do”
within a social field that is dominated, within a market where all the
prices are inflated and the scales are rigged? Modifying Bourdieu’s
model, de Certeau argues that there are not only a variety of strategies
at play in the social field— that is, techniques by which the dominant
classes struggle to accumulate power and capital—but there are also
a wide array of tactics—that is, the more “everyday” struggles of the
dominated classes by which they appropriate and turn to their own
advantage the structures of the dominant social order. These are

--- Page 28 ---
sacred capital 381
what de Certeau calls the more subtle tactics of consumption, the ingen-
ious ways in which the weak make use of the strong and ordinary
social consumers “poach” on the property of others. In such cases,
ordinary social consumers can subvert the discourse and structures of
the dominant order, not by rejecting them, “but by using them with
respect to ends foreign to the system they had to accept ... . Their use
of the dominant social order deflect[s] its power, which they lack the
means to challenge ... . [T]heir difference lay in procedures of con-
sumption” (de Certeau 1984: xi-xii).
3. In search of other-interest: Alternative visions of community
Listen man, my brother,
human beings are the truth above all truths,
there is nothing higher. – song of Candidas (Jhˆ 1995: 102)
Now that the great utopias of the nineteenth century have revealed all
their perversion, it is urgent to create the conditions for a collective
effort to reconstruct a universe o f realist ideals, capable of mobilizing
people’s will without mystifying their consciousness. (Bourdieu 1998: 9)
Thus, the spiritual practices and songs of the Bˆuls offer a powerful
challenge both to Bourdieu’s model of the habitus and to his view of
the religious “marketplace”. But most importantly, the example of
the Bˆuls also poses a serious challenge to Bourdieu’s economic
model of social action and his central notion of “interest”. As we saw
above, there is a basic tension and seeming contradiction in
Bourdieu’s work, hinging around his use of the economic metaphor.
On one hand, Bourdieu sees all action as fundamentally interested, that
is, concerned with the pursuit of some kind of capital, whether mate-
rial or symbolic. The social field is a fiercely competitive game, a
struggle of all against all. “Interest is ... what gets people moving,
what makes them get together, compete and struggle with each
other” (Bourdieu 1990b: 88). Yet, on the other hand, particularly in
his later work, Bourdieu strongly criticizes any form of economic
determinism that would reduce human beings to mere self-interested
consumers, what he calls “the commercial substitute for the citizen”,
governed by the “undivided reign of the market” (Bourdieu 1998: 6).
“What is at stake now is winning back democracy from technocracy.
We must put an end to the reign of the expert in the form of the
World Back or the IMF, who impose without discussion the version

--- Page 29 ---
382 hugh b. urban
of the new Leviathan, the financial markets” (Bourdieu 1998: 25-26).
Hence, there does seem to be in Bourdieu’s work an implicit, yet
never fully articulated concept of “interest” that would go beyond
mere self-interest and turn to a larger concern for the collective. As
he argues in Acts of Resistance, we need to fight against the crippling
definition of the human being as a mere consumer or subject of the
marketplace and, instead, recognize the “universal” interests of hu-
man happiness and well-being: “Against this narrow, short-tern eco-
nomics, we need to put forward an economics of happiness, which would
take note of all the profits, individual and collective, material and
symbolic, associated with activity” (Bourdieu 1998: 40). Thus we are
left with a fundamental tension and unresolved contradiction in
Bourdieu’s work: on one side, there is a rather cynical view of human
nature as inherently self-interested and motivated by the pursuit of
profit, that is, a seemingly “capitalist” view that reproduces the eco-
nomic determinism that he professes to repudiate. Yet, on the other
side, there is the hope for a more universal social concern, transcend-
ing individual interests and seeking some larger ideal of collective
happiness.
The Bˆul songs offer a powerful vision of a different kind of “inter-
est”, one not limited to individual self-interest and the pursuit of
personal profit, but aimed at an alternative model of community.
Rejecting the artificial divisions created by religious and social insti-
tutions, the Bˆul seeks the maner mˆÈus concealed within every human
body:
Oh my mind, do no think for any discrimination based on caste
Open the Puranas and see there is only one caste which is Man
just see that Purusha and Prakrti [male and female]
are the two human divisions
then why is there such excessive eagerness in Veda, Bible and Koran
to establish human differentiation? (Sarkar 1990: 176)
Hence, the ideal of the Bˆul life is to realize this divinity within one’s
own body and to recognize its presence within all others. Rejecting
the hierarchies of conventional social and religious institutions, the
Bˆul becomes part of a new community, a community of the poor
that transcends the material and symbolic capital of wealth, status,
birth, and class.
At the same time, however, we should avoid romanticizing groups
such as the Bˆuls as embodiments of some kind of utopian or egali-
tarian ideal. While there is much to admire in the Bˆuls’ songs and

--- Page 30 ---
sacred capital 383
their vision of the divinity of all human beings, there are also some
less noble aspects of actual Bˆul communities. As Bourdieu reminds
us, we must always be wary of the “misplaced belief in illusory free-
doms” that are in fact only more subtle forms of domination
(Bourdieu 1990b: 15). Resistance and domination are seldom either
clearly distinct or mutually exclusive, but typically bound up in a
complex network of struggle and contestation (Bourdieu 1990b: 155).
Thus one could indeed apply a Bourdieuian critique to the Bˆuls and
find all sorts of interest, competition, and struggle going on within
their particular cultural-religious field. (In fact, I have done so else-
where in my own work on related religious groups of Bengal [Urban
2001].) In his detailed ethnographic study of Bˆuls in West Bengal,
for example, R. M. Sarkar has shown that the Bˆuls’ egalitarian
ideals are not always put into practice in their own communities. Not
only are there internal divisions among different kinds of Bˆuls, but,
perhaps most fundamentally, there is often asymmetry between the
sexes. Theoretically, female Bˆuls should have status and power
equal to that of the males; and, in fact, there are many powerful
female Bˆuls who hold authority over sizable Bˆul communities. Yet
very often, in practice, female Bˆuls are treated primarily as consorts
(sevadˆs“s) in the Bˆuls’ esoteric sexual practices (Sarkar 1990: 71-74).
In short, the actual communal life of many Bˆuls is often less than
ideal or egalitarian, but in some cases seems to reintroduce new
asymmetries of power. But my point here is not that the Bˆuls are
entirely without self-interest, but rather that self-interest is not the
only motivating factor here (or for any human being); rather, there is
also a powerful impulse toward other-interest and the imagining of
other forms of community that are less exploitative or oppressive.
The vision of an egalitarian, non-hierarchical social order, free of the
divisions of class, wealth, or gender, survives throughout the haunting
imagery of the Bˆul songs. Yet, it is always in tension with the rival
forces of self-interest, patriarchy, and the competitive struggle over
both economic and symbolic power.
4. Conclusions: The political roles of the sociologist and the historian of religions
[S]ociology frees us by freeing us from the illusion or freedom, or, more
exactly from the misplaced belief in illusory freedoms. Freedom is not
something given: it is something you conquer—collectively. (Bourdieu
1990b:15)

--- Page 31 ---
384 hugh b. urban
O mind take off your bride’s veil,
and leave your home behind
to proceed to the market of desires.
Why neglect your goal with the pride of your clan?
When taken to the cremation ground,
repentance will burn your ego. – Song of Lˆlan (Bandopadhyay 1989:
68)
The case of the Bˆuls provides us with an excellent illustration of
both the useful applications and the serious limitations of Bourdieu’s
work for the study of religions. Most fundamentally, I would suggest
that we ought to follow Bourdieu in his critique of the artistic field, by
applying the same of kind of rigorous interrogation to the religious
field that Bourdieu applies to that of aesthetics. Just as he calls for the
“barbarous reintegration of aesthetic consumption into the world of
ordinary consumption (against which it endlessly defines itself)”
(1984a: 100), so I would call for the reintegration of religion into the
world of ordinary consumption, into the realms of politics, econom-
ics, and history against which it endlessly defines itself. Yet, in con-
trast to Bourdieu, I would also argue that religion does not only play
a reproductive role in legitimating the dominant status quo in a given
social-political formation; rather, as we see in the songs of the Bˆuls,
it can also have a critical role in challenging and even openly reject-
ing the existing social order.
Thus, in contrast to Bourdieu’s emphasis on “strategies”, I would
follow de Certeau by looking at the more subtle “tactics”, or the ways
in which ordinary consumers resist, subvert, and struggle against the
forces of the dominant social or religious marketplace. Likewise,
whereas Bourdieu emphasizes the ways in which the structures of the
larger social body are inscribed upon the individual body, in the form
of the habitus, I would emphasize the ways in which individual agents
deconstruct, transform, and reconstruct their own habitus, removing
themselves from the dominant social order and reincorporating
themselves into an alternative communal body. Finally, in contrast to
Bourdieu’s fundamentally economic model, I would argue that hu-
man beings are not always or solely governed by the pursuits of self-
interest or acquisition of capital. Rather, they are also capable of
pursuing various kinds of other-interest by seeking alternative forms
of community, quite apart from a hierarchical and asymmetrical
socio-economic structure.
However, perhaps the most important aspect of Bourdieu’s work

--- Page 32 ---
sacred capital 385
for the study of religion lies in his view of the political role of the
scholar. Throughout his work, Bourdieu has insisted that the aca-
demic field is every bit as much an interested, a competitive, and
political field as any other. Academics have their own forms of capi-
tal, both symbolic and material, for which they struggle, and they too
struggle to maintain their own position in a volatile hierarchy. “The
theories, methods and concepts that appear as simple contributions
to the progress of science are also always ‘political’ maneuvers that
attempt to establish, restore, reinforce, protect or reverse a deter-
mined structure of symbolic domination” (Bourdieu 1971: 121; cf.
Bourdieu 1988). Particularly in his later work, moreover, Bourdieu
has also emphasized the political role of the sociologist as a critical
analyst of culture. By unmasking the subtle forms of misrecognition
and symbolic violence that comprise most of human society, the
sociologist is exercising a fundamentally political power. As Swartz
states: “There is a political dimension to Bourdieu’s conception of
what sociology should do in the modern world ... . Acts of research ...
are acts of struggle, conquest and victory over taken for granted
assumptions about social life: scientific research is a struggle against
all forms of symbolic domination” (Swartz 1997: 261). Yet, at the
same time, the sociologists themselves are by no mean exempt from
these political effects. On the contrary, like any other social agent,
sociologists are implicitly tied to wide range of political structures and
processes, which must also be acknowledged and brought to light.
This is the basic aim of Bourdieu’s reflexive sociology, a sociology
that would reflect critically upon the social status and political posi-
tion of the scholar him- or herself (Bourdieu 1989, 1988). Or, in
other words, “socioanalysis simultaneously requires reflexivity, that is
a systematic and rigorous self-critical practice” (Swartz 1997: 11).
Historians of religions would do well to adopt a similar kind of
politically-engaged and reflexively self-critical stance. With Bourdieu,
I would argue that scholars of religions cannot help but be interested
agents with all sorts of political social, economic, and symbolic com-
mitments. And I would argue that we must be as open, honest, and
up-front about our political commitments as possible, always subject-
ing them to scrutiny, critique, and the possibility of change. As Bruce
Lincoln observes, “[i]f myths tell stories about the long ago and far
away for purposes of the place and moment in which these stories are
told, the same may be observed regarding other forms of narrative,
scholarship included ... . Scholars are no different from other human

--- Page 33 ---
386 hugh b. urban
beings. They exist within a time, a place and a social institution ... .
Such processes can never be perfectly neutral ... and disinterested”
(Lincoln 1991: xvi-xvii; cf. Urban 2000). Moreover, I would also
agree with Bourdieu that one of the most important political effects
of a critical study of religions would lie in the analysis and unmasking
of the asymmetries, hierarchies, and oppressive power relations that
are often entangled with religious ideals. For, as Bourdieu repeatedly
reminds us, the most “disinterested” and “otherworldly” of ideals are
often inextricably entwined with the most this-worldly of interests.
However, in contrast to Bourdieu, I would argue that we need to
look closely at the more positive role of religious practices, both in the
critique of conventional social structures and in the imagining of
alternative forms of human relations. The Bˆul songs offer powerful
criticisms of the hypocrisy that governs mainstream religious institu-
tions, pointing out the ways in which sacred authority is used to
marginalize various social or economic groups. The Bˆuls are quite
aware of the ruthless law of the marketplace that governs both social
interaction and religious authority. Hence, I would suggest that
Bourdieu’s rather top-heavy model needs to be complemented by
one like de Certeau’s, which allows more room for the subversive
tactics by which ordinary consumers manipulate, by-pass, or deform
the strategies of those in power (see Urban 2001).
Finally, the Bˆuls also suggest ways to use the discourse of both
religion and the marketplace in new, often subversive and liberating
ways, as a means to transform conventional social relations and to
imagine a new kind of community. It is true that we need to avoid
romanticizing groups such as the Bˆuls as noble champions of some
kind of pure, unfettered human spirit. But that does not mean that
we cannot still look to them for evidence of a different kind of human
interest, an other-interest that transcends the individual desire for
personal profit, status, or capital. Although never fully realized in
living practice, and although always threatened by the forces of
greed, self-interest, and patriarchy, this vision of an alternative, more
egalitarian, or at least less oppressive kind of community survives
throughout these beautiful, at times bitingly ironic religious songs.
Department of Comparative Studies
334 Dulles Hall
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
U.S.A.

--- Page 34 ---
sacred capital 387
References
Bakhtin, Mikhail (1984). Rabelais and his World. Helene Iswolsky (trans.). Bloomington:
University of Indiana Press.
Bandyopadhyay, Pranab (1989). Bˆuls of Bengal. Calcutta: Firma KLM.
Baudrillard, Jean (1975). The Mirror of Production. Mark Poster (trans.). St. Louis:
Telos.
— (1988). Selected Writings. Mark Poster (ed.). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Bˆul, PˆrÈa Das (1970). Bˆnglˆr Bˆul o Gˆn. Calcutta. Oriental Book Co.
Bell, Catherine (1992). Ritual Theory, Ritual Practice. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bhattacharya, Deben (1978 [1969]). Songs of the Bards of Bengal. New York: Grove.
Bha««ˆcˆrya, Upendranath (1981). Bˆnglˆr Bˆul o Bˆul Gˆn. Calcutta: Oriental Book
Co.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1971). Intellectual field and creative project. In M. F. D. Young
(ed.), Knowledge and Control: New Directions for the Sociology of Education. London:
Collier MacMillan.
— (1974). The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. Randal Johnson
(ed.). New York: Columbia University Press; Cambridge: Polity.
— (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice. Richard Nice (trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
— (1984a). Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste. Richard Nice (trans.).
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
— (1984b). Language and Symbolic Power. John B. Thompson (ed.); Gino Raymond and
Matthew Adamson (trans.). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
— (1986). The forms of capital. In John G. Richardson (ed.), Handbook of Theory and
Research for the Sociology of Education, 241-258. New York: Greenwood.
— (1987a). What makes a social class? On the theoretical and practical existence of
groups. Berkeley Journal of Sociology 32: 1-18.
— (1987b). Legitimation and structured interests in Weber’s sociology of religion. In
Sam Shimster and Scott Lash (eds), Max Weber, Rationality and Modernity, 110-36.
London: Allen & Unwin.
— (1988). Homo Academicus. Peter Collier (trans.). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
— (1990a). The Logic of Practice. Richard Nice (trans.). Stanford: Stanford University
Press; London: Polity.
— (1990b). In Other Words: Essays Toward a Reflexive Sociology. Matthew Adamson
(trans.). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
— (1991). The genesis and structure of the religious field. Comparative Social Research
13: 1-43.
— (1994). The Field of Cultural Production. Randal Johnson and Lawrence D. Kritzman
(eds). New York: Columbia University Press.
— (1998). Acts of Resistance: Against the Tyranny of the Market. Richard Nice (trans.). New
York: The New Press.
— (2001). Masculine Domination. Richard Nice (trans.). Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre and Loic J. D. Wacquant (1992). An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Caillé, Alain (1992). Esquisse d’une critique de l’economie générale de la pratique.
Cahiers du LASA 12(13): 109-219.
Calhoun, Craig, Edward LiPuma, and Moishe Postone (eds) (1993). Bourdieu: Critical
Perspectives. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- Page 35 ---
388 hugh b. urban
Capwell, Charles (1986). The Music of the Bˆuls of Bengal. Kent: Kent State University
Press.
Chatterjee, Partha (1988). The Nation and its Fragments: Colonial and Post-Colonial Histo-
ries. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Comaroff, Jean (1985). Body of Power, Spirit of Resistance: The History and Culture of a South
African People. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dˆs, Motilˆl and P(cid:157)yˆ§kanti Mahˆpatra (1958). Lˆlan-G“tikˆ: Lˆlan ¥ˆh Phakirer Gˆn.
Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press.
Das, Rahul Peter (1992). Problematic aspects of the sexual rituals of the Bˆuls.
Journal of the American Oriental Society 112: 388-432.
Dasgupta, Alokeranjan and Mary Ann Dasgupta (1977). Roots in the Void: Bˆul Songs of
Bengal. Calcutta: K. P. Bagchi.
Dasgupta, Shashibhushan (1968). Obscure Religious Cults, as a Background to Bengali
Literature. Calcutta: Firma KLM.
Datta, Ak§aykumˆr (1987). Bhˆratvar§“ya Upˆsaka Sampradˆya. Calcutta: KaruÈˆ
Prakˆ²in“.
de Certeau, Michel (1984). The Practice of Everyday Life. Steven Rendall (trans.).
Berkeley: University of California Press.
DiMaggio, Paul (1979). Review essay on Pierre Bourdieu. American Journal of Sociology
84: 1460-1475.
Dimock, Edward C. (1966). The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in the
Vai§Èava-Sahajiyˆ Cult of Bengal. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert and Paul Rabinow (1993). Can there be a science of existential
structure and social meaning? In Craig Calhoun, Edward LiPuma, and Moishe
Postone (eds), Bourdieu: Critical Perspectives, 35-44. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Eliade, Mircea (1958). Patterns in Comparative Religion. New York: Sheed & Ward.
Fowler, Bridget (1997). Pierre Bourdieu and Cultural Theory: Critical Investigations. London:
Sage.
Gartman, David (1991). Culture as class symbolization or mass reification: A critique
of Bourdieu’s Distinction. American Journal of Sociology 97: 421-427.
Guha, Ranajit (1983). Elementary Aspects of Peasant Insurgency in Colonial India. Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
Haq, Muhammad Enamul (1975). A History of Sufi-ism in Bengal. Dacca: Asiastic
Society of Bangladesh.
Hayes, Glen A. (1985). Shapes for the soul: A study of body symbolism in the
Vaiava-Sahajiyˆ tradition of medieval Bengal. Doctoral dissertation. University
of Chicago.
Honneth, Axel (1986). The fragmented world of symbolic forms: Reflections on
Pierre Bourdieu’s sociology of culture. Theory, Culture and Society 3(3): 55-66.
Horrocks, Chris and Zoran Jevtic (1999). Introducing Baudrillard. New York: Icon
Books.
Inden, Ronald B., and Ralph W. Nicholas (1987). Kinship in Bengali Culture. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Jenkins, Richard (1992). Pierre Bourdieu. New York: Routledge.
Jha, Saktinath (1995). Cari-candra bhed: Use of the four moons. In Rajat Kanta Ray
(ed.), Mind, Body and Society: Life and Mentality in Colonial Bengal, 65-108. Calcutta:
Oxford University Press.
Jhˆ, Saktinath (1995). Phakir Lˆlan Sˆin: De², Kˆl ebang ¥ilpa. Calcutta: Samvad.
Karabel, Jerome and A. H. Halsey (eds) (1977). Power and Ideology in Education. New
York: Oxford University Press.

--- Page 36 ---
sacred capital 389
Lincoln, Bruce (1991). Death, War and Sacrifice: Studies in Ideology and Practice. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
LiPuma, Edward (1993). Culture and the concept of culture in a theory of practice.
In Craig Calhoun, Edward LiPuma, and Moishe Postone (eds), Bourdieu: Critical
Perspectives, 14-34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mansur Udd“n, Muhammad (1942). HˆrˆmaÈi: Lok Sang“t Sa‡graha. Calcutta: Univer-
sity of Calcutta Press.
Mauss, Marcel (1979). Sociology and Psychology: Essays. Ben Brewster (trans.). London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Milner, Murray (1994). Status and Sacredness: A General Theory of Status Relations and an
Analysis of Indian Culture. New York: Oxford University Press.
Openshaw, Jeanne (1997). The web of deceit: Challenges to Hindu and Muslim
‘orthodoxies’ by Bˆuls of Bengal. Religion 27: 297-305.
Salomon, Carol (1991). The cosmogonic riddles of Lˆlan Fakir. In Arjun Appadurai
(ed.), Gender, Genre and Power in South Asian Expressive Traditions. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
— (1995). Bˆul songs. In Donald S. Lopez (ed.), Religions of India in Practice, 187-208.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sarkar, R. M. (1990). Bˆuls of Bengal: In the Quest of the Man of the Heart. New Delhi:
Gain.
Sen, Sudipta (1996). Passages of authority: Rulers, traders and marketplaces in Ben-
gal and Benaras, 1700-1750. The Calcutta Historical Journal 17(1).
— (1998). Empire of Free Trade: The East India Company and the Making of the Colonial
Marketplace. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Swartz, David (1997). Culture and Power: The Sociology of Pierre Bourdieu. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Urban, Hugh B. (1995). Secret bodies: Re-imagining the body in the Vai§Èava-
Sahajiyˆ tradition of Bengal. Journal of South Asian Literature 28: 45-62.
— (1999). The politics of madness: The construction and manipulation of the “Bˆul”
image in colonial Bengal. South Asia 22: 13-46.
— (2000). Making a place to take a stand: Jonathan Z. Smith and the politics and
poetics of comparison. Method & Theory in the Study of Religion 12: 339-378.
— (2001). Songs of Ecstasy: Tantric and Devotional Songs from Colonial Bengal. New York:
Oxford University Press.

--- Page 38 ---
Copyright of Method & Theory in the Study of Religion is the property of Brill Academic Publishers and its
content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.