--- Page 1 ---
Chapter Title: Vinaya Monasteries, Public Abbacies, and State Control of Buddhism
under the Song (960-1279)
Chapter Author(s): MORTEN SCHLUTTER
Book Title: Going Forth
Book Subtitle: Visions of Buddhist Vinaya
Book Author(s): Stanley Weinstein
Book Editor(s): William M. Bodiford
Published by: University of Hawai'i Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvvn5qj.10
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
University of Hawai'i Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access
to Going Forth
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 2 ---
Chapter 6
Vinaya Monasteries, Public Abbacies,
and State Control of Buddhism under
the Song (960-1279)
MORTEN SCHLUTTER
THE BUDDHIST vinaya pictures the monastic community as a largely
autonomous, self-regulating body. But nowhere in premodern East
Asia was monastic Buddhism truly free of controls imposed by the
secular state, even when the Buddhist church exercised consider-
able political influence. In China, the imperial government always
considered the monastic Buddhist community and its activities as
properly subject to state supervision. Chinese dynasties actively
sought to regulate and control many aspects of the Buddhist
church's activities, such as ordination procedures, the building of
monasteries, the activities of monks and nuns, and the teachings
Buddhism was spreading. The Chinese state was traditionally ex-
tremely hostile toward unregulated religious groups and tended to
view all religious expression with suspicion (McKnight 1992, 75-
79). The fear was that religious groups could disrupt public
order, threaten the authority of the state, corrupt people's morals,
and even become sources of rebellion. The mainstream Buddhist
church was tolerated precisely because of its close ties with the
government and its elite's relative aloofness from the populace.
Any Buddhist group that appeared deviant was persecuted by the
state—and decried by the Buddhist establishment. The state never
completely lost its suspicion of even the elite Buddhist church, and
from time to time emperors sought to all but eradicate Buddhism
from Chinese soil (prior to the Song there were major suppressions
in the years 258, 446, 574, 845, 955; see Overmyer 1976, 23). How-
ever, government control of Buddhism and other religion was al-
ways far from total, and many factors combined to keep much of
the growth and development of monastic Buddhism beyond the
reach of the state.
136
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 3 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 137
During the Song A dynasty (960-1279) monastic Buddhism ex-
perienced a tremendous growth but was also more tightly regu-
lated. At first control measures that had existed earlier, such as
rules and restrictions concerning ordinations, were further devel-
oped and vigorously implemented (Moroto 1990, 233). But the
Song government also instituted several innovative ways of control-
ling monastic Buddhism and concerned itself with aspects of it that
had not been previously legislated or directly controlled. These new
control measures had a profound and lasting impact on the devel-
opment of Buddhism in the Song and subsequent dynasties.
In this essay I focus my attention on the new Song system of
classifying Buddhist monasteries as either "hereditary" or "public"
according to how their abbots were selected. Although the Song
monastic classification system has received some attention from
scholars (Takao 1975, Chikusa 1982, Huang 1989, Getz 1994),
much of it is not well understood, and the profound impact the im-
plementation of the system had on the development of the Chan ^
school has hitherto gone unnoticed. Furthermore, because heredi-
tary monasteries in the Song were often referred to as "vinaya mon-
asteries,'' confusion about the meaning of this term has given rise to
serious misunderstandings in scholarship concerning both the sys-
tem of hereditary and public monasteries and the nature and his-
tory of the Vinaya school.
The Northern Song System of Registering Monasteries
From its establishment the Song government, like previous imperial
governments, saw the primary raison d'etre for the Buddhist church
to be the supernatural assistance and blessings it could provide to
the state and the emperor. Prayers for the long life of the emperor
and for the prosperity of the state were important functions of all
Buddhist monasteries, and emperors no doubt felt they could ac-
crue merit for themselves and their dynasty through pious acts
toward Buddhism. The Song court patronized Buddhism in various
ways. Famous monasteries were given money or grants of land,
and illustrious monks were invited to court and honored with the
bestowal of purple robes. The state was actively engaged in the
translation of Buddhist scriptures as well as in the compiling and
printing of the Buddhist canon. The imperial family also used the
services of Buddhist clergy directly. Specially built monasteries
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 4 ---
138 Morten Schlutter
were charged with taking care of the imperial tombs, and a monas-
tery was even erected on the site of the first Song emperor Taizu's
Affl (r. 960-976) birthplace (Song huiyao jigao fasc.
200.7879c). But the Song rulers were very aware of the considerable
economic and social power that the Buddhist church wielded and
saw a need to regulate and exercise control over monastic Bud-
dhism. The imperial government was uneasy with the enormous
economic impact the building and maintenance of monasteries
and the upkeep of monks and nuns had on the economy. It was
also concerned about the social and cultural impact of Buddhism
and worried that the Buddhist church could become a threat to the
state's authority or that monasteries might harbor criminals and
insurgents.1
Central to the Northern Song (960-1127) policy of tolerating
and even encouraging the growth of monastic Buddhism, while at
the same time seeking to keep it in check, was its policy of granting
name plaques (e to a large number of monasteries (Takao 1975,
57-60; Chikusa 1982, 83-110; Huang 1989, 302-305). This policy
had originally been a way of honoring certain important monas-
teries; in the Tang ® (618-906) monasteries with name plaques
enjoyed a high degree of security from officials who wished to
suppress Buddhism, while those that were merely on the list of
approved monasteries did not have the same level of protection.2
During the initial stages of the notorious Huichang (841-847)
suppression of Buddhism, when the government issued an edict
ordering the dismantling of various types of Buddhist establish-
ments, monasteries with name plaques were explicitly exempted.3
Owning a name plaque also became crucial for a monastery during
another vigorous suppression of Buddhism that took place under
the Latter Zhou (951-960), the regime under which the Song
founder Taizu had served as a general. The Zhou ruler ordered
in 955 that any monastery without an imperially bestowed name
plaque was to be destroyed.4
The Song government exploited the positive connotations of
name plaques and used them as a way of registering monasteries
(Chikusa 1982, 101). Beginning with the second Song emperor, Tai-
zong AA (r. 976-997), the imperial government granted name
plaques to monasteries in large numbers. Although the plaque
granting took place throughout the Northern Song (and at a much
reduced scale in the later part of the Song known as the Southern
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 5 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 139
Song, 1127-1279), it was especially the reigns of Zhenzong R^
(r. 977-1022) and Yingzong ^^ (r. 1063-1067) that saw large-scale
granting of plaques (Chikusa 1982, 109; Huang 1989, 304-305).
Usually the main requirement for a plaque was that a monastery's
buildings total thirty bays or more (Chikusa 1982, 98-99). This
meant that numerous smaller monasteries of primarily local im-
portance could be granted plaques; prior to the Song only especially
illustrious or imperially favored monasteries were granted plaques.
It is clear that the Song government's driving motivation in
granting plaques was to bring monasteries of any significance
under control and supervision. But in spite of the occasional edicts
that ordered the destruction of monasteries with no plaques (i.e.,
those under thirty bays and of no particular significance), plaque-
less monasteries seem to have flourished and orders of destruction
were rarely, if ever, carried out. The Song government appears to
have been fairly unconcerned with smaller monasteries, probably
because it was thought that those under thirty bays in general
would not be important enough in local life to warrant strong
action.5 It would also seem that the decrees ordering no new mon-
asteries to be built must have been largely ignored because through-
out the Northern Song monasteries that qualified for name plaques
by having more than thirty bays continued to appear.6
The Northern Song government's policy of registering and facil-
itating control of all monasteries of importance through the grant-
ing of plaques was highly successful. Receiving an imperial plaque
was perceived as a great honor and could provide security for a
monastery in times of persecution. It is not surprising then that
those in charge of monasteries petitioned for them with great en-
thusiasm. Thus the state achieved its goal of facilitating control in
a way that secured the cooperation of the clergy, who otherwise
may not have felt that government registration was beneficial to
them.7 A large number of monasteries were registered during the
Northern Song: One source from about 1059 reports that there
were thirty-nine thousand registered Buddhist monasteries in the
empire, up from twenty-five thousand fifty years earlier (Chikusa
1982, 89).
Registering monasteries was essential for the state, for without
doing so, it could not successfully set down and enforce rules and
regulations for them. The registration of monasteries facilitated
an entirely new way of regulating Buddhist monasteries that had a
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 6 ---
140 Morten Schlutter
profound impact on the further development of Buddhism in
China. This was the system of classifying monasteries or, more spe-
cifically, their abbacies, into two main groups: hereditary (usually
termed "succession" [jiayi E^Z], but also known as "disciple" [tudi
ffiA] or "ordained disciple'' [dudi ® A]) monasteries and public
("ten directions" [shifang +A]) monasteries (cf. Welch 1967). As I
will discuss shortly, a hereditary monastery was associated with a
group of monks who held the rights to occupy its abbacy; the mon-
astery and its property in a sense belonged to these monks. Such
monasteries could be very large, and many owned land and other
property, but in the Song, most were small to medium sized. A
hereditary monastery was "private" in the sense that outsiders could
not assume any of its offices, and monks from the outside did not
have rights to reside there. In contrast, a public monastery was a
kind of independent, self-owned institution over which no individ-
ual or group of individuals could claim ownership and the abbacy
of which supposedly was open to any qualified candidate within
certain sectarian restrictions. Any monk with good credentials
could be admitted into a public monastery and advance in its vari-
ous monastic offices. All the largest and most important monas-
teries in the Song eventually became public monasteries.
Hereditary Monasteries
Hereditary monasteries were recognized by the state as in effect the
legal property of the monks or nuns living there. The residents of a
hereditary monastery were bound together in a complex lineage re-
lationship and formed a "tonsure family'' (cf. Welch 1967, 129-134).
Its abbacy was passed down through the tonsure family only and
outsiders were excluded. Through its control of the abbacy the ton-
sure family was able to retain property rights to the monastery and
its land because the abbot and his officers were the only ones who
could make decisions concerning it. Like the Chan lineages and
those developed within other Buddhist groups such as the Tiantai
An school, the lineage of a tonsure family was similar to that of a
regular family descent group except that it was based on a teacher-
disciple relationship. Thus the disciples of one master were re-
garded as brothers, their master's master was their grandfather,
and their master's fellow disciples were their uncles.8 But unlike
the Chan model, the teacher-disciple relationship in a tonsure fam-
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 7 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 141
ily was not based on a teacher sanctioning the enlightenment expe-
rience or profound insight of a student, but on the tonsure the nov-
ice received on entering the Buddhist order. The novice became the
personally ordained disciple of the master giving or sponsoring his
tonsure and was adopted into the tonsure family of that master.
Such personally ordained disciples were usually referred to as "du-
dizi" S ^ A. In this way, all monks and nuns were members of a
tonsure family, and for the vast majority their tonsure lineage was
what gave them identity and defined the framework of their monas-
tic career. Some monks and nuns went on to gain admission to one
of the big public monasteries and perhaps later received a special
transmission in the Chan or Tiantai lineages, but even so they re-
mained members of their tonsure family and any disciples they
ordained became members of that family.
Hereditary monasteries may have had a long history by the
Song, and it is likely that prior to the Song most monasteries were
in some sense hereditary.9 However, it was only in the Song that he-
reditary monasteries acquired a specific legal status, which recog-
nized the tonsure family's rights to its monastery. This legal status
no doubt offered the tonsure families in hereditary monasteries
some protection against those who might try to usurp their prop-
erty. But together with the system of registration, it also greatly fa-
cilitated government control and made it possible for the state to set
down and enforce rules concerning many aspects of monastic life,
including how the abbacy was to be filled.
An important source for the study of Song legislation on monas-
tic Buddhism is the section on Buddhism and Daoism in the Song
law compendium the Classified Legal Articles of the Qingyuan Period
(Qingyuan tiaofa shilei ftAfft&ffffi).10 The Classified Legal Articles
is the only extant (though incomplete) Song law manual. Although
it dates from the Southern Song, many of the regulations it contains
are clearly of long standing, and in the Buddhism and Daoism sec-
tion some were even long outdated by the Qingyuan period (1195-
1200). In this text rules for the passing down of the abbacy in a he-
reditary monastery are clearly spelled out. For example, when an
abbot of a "nonpublic" monastery died or for some reason stepped
down, the abbacy passed on to one of his dharma brothers (the
other tonsure disciples of his master) according to their order in the
lineage, that is, when they were ordained. If there were no dharma
brothers available, the abbacy was passed to one of the retiring
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 8 ---
142 Morten Schlutter
abbot's disciples or to one of his dharma brothers' disciples, also in
accordance with seniority (fasc. 50.476d). In this way, everybody in
each generation had a chance, at least theoretically, to succeed to
the abbacy, and only when one generation had been exhausted
would the abbacy be passed on to the next generation. It seems the
abbacy in a hereditary monastery was often held by one person
until he passed away, so many members of big tonsure family may
not have lived long enough to succeed to the abbacy.11
On the other hand, a monk capable of taking over a vacant ab-
bacy may not always have been available from the tonsure family. A
note in the Classified Legal Articles (fasc. 50, 476d) says that if there
is a worthy, well-esteemed monk whom the congregation wants as
abbot, they can present him to the authorities to have him first in-
stalled to fill the position. This probably refers for the most part to a
situation where no one in the tonsure family was ready to take over
the abbacy, such as instances when everyone in line for the abbacy
was underage. It is also possible that the tonsure family could sim-
ply decide to bring an abbot in from outside the group, although it
would seem likely that the monks normally in line for the abbacy
would protest such a move.12 The Classified Legal Articles further
states that only those who were actively involved with the affairs of
a hereditary monastery could be appointed to its abbacy (fasc. 50,
476b). Those who had been away from the monastery for more
than half a year or who were not actually fulfilling the duties of
their positions were not allowed to take over the abbacy even if
they were in line for it. The text also asserts that, in most cases,
those who had been punished by the law could not succeed to the
abbacy (fasc. 50, 477a).
Significantly, a stipulation required the newly selected abbot of
a hereditary monastery to be approved by the authorities before he
could be installed in the abbacy (fasc. 50.476b). Thus, although the
Song state had to recognize the rights of the tonsure family to con-
trol the abbacy of its monastery, the government could at least set
down very strict rules for how the succession was to take place and
who in fact could occupy the abbacy. As we have just seen, by law
only those who were actively taking part in the life of a monastery
could become its abbots; this rule helped ensure that the govern-
ing of the monastery remained a local affair and thus easier to su-
pervise. Because all appointments had to be approved by officials,
there were plenty of opportunities in the final instance for local au-
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 9 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 143
thorities to intervene in various ways and to be sure that no unde-
sirable person occupied an abbacy in their area of jurisdiction.
There are other indications that the state in principle acknowl-
edged that a tonsure family had a legal right to its monastery.
An article in the Classified Legal Articles concerning the selection
of abbots at public monasteries notes that the succession rules
must be followed strictly, even at previously hereditary monasteries
where "the disciples had agreed to [the] change into public'' (fasc.
50.476c). This remark indicates that a tonsure family had to agree
to its monastery being changed into a public one and implies that
the state recognized that the family had property rights. As will be
discussed below, several documented cases of the conversion of he-
reditary monasteries into public ones further attest to this.
Finally, hereditary monasteries were probably supposed to ap-
ply to the government to have their status officially approved.13
But this seems to have been rarely done—at least there are very
few records of such applications. Most likely the understanding
was that if a monastery was not categorized as public it was auto-
matically considered hereditary.14
Public Monasteries
As noted above, the Classified Legal Articles addresses its rules for
succession in hereditary monasteries to "all nonpublic'' institutions.
This suggests that the most important feature of the system of clas-
sification, and its main innovation, was the public monastery. In a
public monastery the abbacy was not passed down in a tonsure
family. In fact, an abbot's own tonsure disciples were not allowed
to succeed him to the abbacy, a measure clearly meant to prevent a
return to a hereditary system. The abbot of a public monastery was
supposed to be the best candidate available, whether he could be
found within the walls of the monastery or had to be invited from
elsewhere.
Some form of the public abbacy system appears to have existed
prior to the Song.15 But although the Song government did not in-
vent the system of public abbacies, it was only in the Song that pub-
lic monasteries become an official legal category. The Song govern-
ment seems very quickly to have become aware of the advantages
of having monasteries designated as public and began early on
to promote public abbacies as an important part of a national
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 10 ---
144 Morten Schlutter
policy toward monastic Buddhism. Unlike the case of hereditary
monasteries, where the secular authorities' power over the selection
process was limited because the choice of abbot was mainly deter-
mined by rules of succession within the tonsure family, the abba-
cies at public monasteries were wide open to state control.
The Classified Legal Articles includes a section of rules concern-
ing the selection of the abbot at a public monastery. According to
this text, when the abbacy at a public monastery became vacant,
the prefectural authorities were to charge the local Buddhist regis-
try (Seng zhengsi -A^l) with arranging a meeting between the ab-
bots of the other public monasteries (presumably from the whole
prefecture). These abbots were to select someone (again, it would
seem, from the prefecture) who had been a monk for many years,
who was accomplished in conduct and study, and who was held in
high esteem by other monks. The choice of the gathered abbots was
presented to the prefectural authorities, who would investigate and
confirm the appointment if no problems were found. If there was
no suitable candidate, perhaps because no one could be found in
the prefecture or because the abbots could not agree on anyone,
the authorities would select a monk from another area who was
held in high regard and who was not known to have committed
any crime or to have had other things against him. The Classified
Legal Articles stresses that this person, once chosen, could not be
substituted. Also, as mentioned above, even if the monastery previ-
ously had been hereditary, these rules still had to be obeyed (p.
476c). Another source that casts some light on the procedure of
appointing a new abbot in a public monastery is the Pure Rules for
Chan Monasteries (Chanyuan qinggui ffi^^^), compiled by the
monk Changlu Zongze AM A© in 1103. Although this code is spe-
cifically for public monasteries associated with the Chan school,
much of what it contains is derived from the standard vinaya, and
later monastic codes of other schools are very similar to it (see Yifa
in this volume). The procedures of the Pure Rules for Chan Monas-
teries in general do not seem unique to the Chan school.
Interestingly, the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries does not de-
scribe how an abbot was to be selected. However, it does include a
detailed outline of the procedure for inviting a new abbot once he
had been chosen (fasc. 7, pp. 250-255). This seems to have been a
rather complicated affair. From the monastery with a vacant ab-
bacy a group of envoys was chosen to go the monastery where the
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 11 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 145
prospective abbot was residing. They carried with them numerous
letters and documents from officials, the monastery itself, Buddhist
officials in the area, abbots of other monasteries in the area, lay pa-
trons of the monastery, and retired officials, in addition to letters
and reports from the withdrawing abbot to the local authorities in
both the area where he had been serving and where the prospective
abbot resided (fasc. 7, p. 250). The envoys traveled to the prospec-
tive abbot's monastery and lodged there while one of them went to
present the various documents to local officials. In the event that
the officials refused to let the prospective abbot go, one of the en-
voys would return to their home district and present the refusal to
the officials there. If the officials in the home district wanted the en-
voys to make a second request they would do so; if not, the envoys
would all return home. The authorities in the prospective abbot's
area had to agree to his release before the candidate himself could
be formally presented with an invitation (fasc. 7, p. 251; cf. Yifa
2002, 212-215). Although much of what is found in the Pure Rules
for Chan Monasteries is perhaps prescriptive rather than descriptive
(i.e., reflecting how its author thought things ought to be done
rather than how things were actually done), this section is likely to
have been based on Zongze's own personal experience and is hardly
an idealized account. It is probable that the process described was
common to all public monasteries and not specific to Chan public
monasteries.
The most striking aspect of the accounts in both the Classified
Legal Articles and the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries is the depic-
tion of the very active and central role that the secular authorities
played in the selection and invitation of a new abbot. According to
the instructions in the Classified Legal Articles, the secular author-
ities were to initiate the search for a new abbot; if there were any
problems in finding a candidate, they were to step in and select
someone directly. Of course, as with appointments to hereditary
monasteries, the authorities always had to approve the choice of a
new abbot. The account in the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries
nicely complements the one found in the Classified Legal Articles.
Again it is very clear that the secular authorities played a central
role. Among other things, officials in the district of the candidate
had the power to refuse to release him; and only after they had de-
cided to do so could the prospective abbot be formally invited to the
new post.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 12 ---
146 Morten Schlutter
Although the Classified Legal Articles and the Pure Rules for
Chan Monasteries depict the secular authorities as having decisive
power in the selection of an abbot, members of the Buddhist clergy
in both accounts have an important role to play. According to the
Classified Legal Articles, abbots of other monasteries were actually
charged with picking a candidate to present to the authorities, and
the statement in the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries that the envoys
were to carry with them letters from the abbots in the area of the
vacant monastery may be seen as a confirmation of this. The possi-
bility that the person chosen for the abbacy might decline the posi-
tion is also made explicit in the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries
(fasc. 7, 252).
Reading the Classified Legal Articles it would seem that the new
abbot in most cases was expected to be found within the prefecture;
in contrast the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries assumes he will be
found in a place outside the jurisdiction of the officials searching
for an abbot.16 According to the Classified Legal Articles the selec-
tion of the new abbot became the sole responsibility of the officials
if he had to be found outside the prefecture, something that is not
reflected in the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries. It is possible that
the Classified Legal Articles stems from a time when public monas-
teries had become so common that finding an abbot locally was
easy. On the other hand, it seems that by the thirteenth century at
least half of all registered monasteries were public (cf. Takao 1975,
67), and a number of prefectures must have had several hundred
public monasteries: It would hardly have been practicable to gather
abbots from all of them for a meeting. The Classified Legal Articles is
probably reiterating older rules on how the selection of an abbot
ought to be done rather than how it was usually done in the late
twelfth century. The fact that the Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries
does not include any information on how the abbot was to be se-
lected is also noteworthy. It may be a recognition by its editor that
the clergy had little or no control over most appointments. There is,
in fact, much evidence that from early on in the Song the abbot of a
public monastery was in many cases appointed directly by secular
authorities—without members of the clergy having any formal role
in the selection of the candidate. No legislation appears to have ex-
isted for this kind of appointment, but it was very widespread. Di-
rect appointment would most often take place at a prefectural level,
and in this case the appointing authority was usually the prefect.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 13 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 147
But the appointment could also come directly from the court, ulti-
mately deriving its authority from the emperor himself.
The direct appointment of abbots to public monasteries by sec-
ular authorities would seem to be a blatant encroachment on the
power of the Buddhist church, and one would perhaps expect the
clergy to be unhappy with such appointments. But this does not
seem to have been normally the case. In biographies of Buddhist
monks it is often mentioned that they were appointed to such and
such a post by the command of a prefect or through the recommen-
dation of famous literati (which probably then led to an appoint-
ment by the prefect). These appointments clearly were seen as evi-
dence of the importance and eminence of a particular monk. Of
course, imperial appointments were even more prestigious, and
much is made of monks who were appointed to abbacies by impe-
rial command.
The practice of direct appointments to abbacies, whether by the
prefect or by imperial command, does not seem to have been a for-
mal category during most of the Song.17 But in 1103, a special class
of monasteries called Chongning (later renamed Tianning
Wanshou was established (Chikusa 1982, 95-98). These
were Buddhist monasteries set up specifically to pray for the long
life of the emperor. Each prefecture was charged with setting up
one of these monasteries, although it is not clear whether new mon-
asteries were built or existing ones appropriated. The Chongning
monasteries were given various privileges, and it was decreed that
the most illustrious monks in the empire were to be appointed to
their abbacies (Luohu yelu M^WM, Z 2B.15.497b). The abbots for
the Chongning monasteries were naturally appointed by imperial
command, and it is seems likely that this inspired imperial appoint-
ments to the abbacies of other monasteries deemed important to
the state. In the late Southern Song, the practice of imperially ap-
pointed abbacies seems to have been formalized by classifying the
most important public monasteries in the so-called "five moun-
tains'' system, in which all abbots were imperially appointed (cf.
Imaeda 1970).
Most of the extant biographies of Song-dynasty monks note that
their subjects were appointed to at least some of their posts by di-
rect order from secular authorities. For example, every monk in
the Song Caodong ^^ Chan lineage for whom relevant biographi-
cal information can be found is reported to have been appointed to
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 14 ---
148 Morten Schlutter
abbacies by influential officials and, for the more illustrious ones,
by imperial order. Random sampling of the biographies of monks
in other Chan lineages confirms this pervasive tendency. These
monks would be moved from monastery to monastery at the will of
the politically powerful, and it is clear that the clerical community
had little or no direct influence over their appointments.
However, the extant biographical material probably distorts the
picture. Relatively few public monasteries would have been consid-
ered important enough for the court or powerful officials to take a
direct interest. By the late twelfth century there may have been as
many as twenty thousand public monasteries in the Song empire.
Only a small percentage of these, the largest and most famous,
would ever have had their abbots appointed directly by the court
or a high official. The monks for whom biographical information
is still available were almost all part of the clerical elite and exactly
the kind of people who would be appointed to famous monasteries.
Virtually nothing is known about the vast majority of monks who
served as abbots at the less illustrious public monasteries. It is quite
likely that at many of these monasteries, and perhaps also at some
of the more prestigious ones, abbots were picked for their posts by a
congregation of their peers in a fashion similar to the system out-
lined in the Classified Legal Articles. The notion that this method
was the proper one certainly persisted, and a very similar process
is described in a Chan code from the Yuan ^ (1279-1368) dynasty
(Qixiu Baizhang qinggui T 48.1130b).
But there was yet another way by which a monk could be ap-
pointed to the abbacy of a public monastery. At times, secular au-
thorities would demand bribes for, or outright sell, the right to the
position. This practice seems to have become increasingly common
during the course of the Song. As public monasteries became more
numerous, many monks had a chance to be appointed to a public
abbacy. This was naturally an attractive opportunity since it was a
prestigious position in the clerical world. But there was another as-
pect of the matter, which seems to have loomed large. Even smaller
public monasteries frequently had considerable holdings of land
and other property and, without the check of an entrenched tonsure
family, abbots at such institutions often took the opportunity to en-
rich themselves at the expense of the monastery.18 Unscrupulous
officials recognized this and encouraged the trend by demanding
bribes to install someone as abbot at a public monastery.19
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 15 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 149
The notion of having to pay for an abbot's position at a public
monastery became institutionalized, at least in Fujian when
in 1131 the prefect of Fujian, Zhang Shou (1084-1145), con-
ferred with the local literati and, as a means of creating revenue,
set up a system by which abbacies were auctioned off to the highest
bidder. The forty-odd top monasteries in Fujian were exempted
(Song huiyao jigao, fasc. 134.5240d; Chikusa 1982, 163). It is possi-
ble that such a system became common elsewhere. Having to pay
either bribes to officials or money to the provincial coffers no doubt
further encouraged abbots at public monasteries to exploit their
institutions for all they were worth. This exploitation became a
problem of such magnitude in the late Song that many public mon-
asteries converted back to the hereditary system, in spite of the se-
vere laws forbidding it (Takao 1975, 65).
Conversion of Hereditary Monasteries into
Public Monasteries
Although the Song government's laws stipulated severe punish-
ments for those who tried to convert a public monastery into a he-
reditary one, it was quite easy to get permission to turn a hereditary
monastery into a public one (Classified Legal Articles, fasc. 50.476a).
Clearly the state had a strong interest in having as many monas-
teries as possible be public rather than hereditary. Whether the ab-
bot at a public monastery was chosen directly by the court or local
authorities, or the abbacy was sold to the highest bidder, or the
abbot was selected in a process that heavily involved officials, the
state maintained a high level of control. Furthermore, abbots in
public monasteries usually held their position for only a few years,
and every time a new abbot was selected government officials could
make their influence felt.
As we have seen, the Song state in principle recognized the
rights of the tonsure family to its monastery, and a rule existed
that the tonsure family's agreement was needed to turn a hereditary
monastery into a public one. Because such a change in effect meant
that the tonsure family lost all rights to its monastery, this seems
reasonable enough. Tonsure disciples were excluded from taking
over the abbacy of a public monastery from their master or even
holding other important monastic office, so the disciples in line for
the abbacy of a hereditary monastery would lose both their rights to
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 16 ---
150 Morten Schlutter
the abbacy as well as any chance of ever obtaining it (Shishi yaolan
ff^MR, T 54.302b2-3). Furthermore, monks must have had the
right to stay in the monastery of their tonsure family, where they
would be fed and could live comfortable lives; no one seems to
have had an inalienable right to stay in a public monastery, where
life usually was much more strictly regulated.
In an early well-documented instance of a hereditary monastery
being turned into a public one, further indications are found that
the tonsure family, and especially the younger generation of disci-
ples who had a good chance of succeeding to the abbacy, had to
agree to the change. This was the case at Yanqing MA Monas-
tery, which the famous monk of the Tiantai school Siming Zhili I
(960-1028), together with Yiwen petitioned the court
in 1010 to convert into a public monastery dedicated to the Tian-
tai teachings (Getz 1994, 139-159). Accompanying Zhili and Yi-
wen's petition was another petition from six of their personally or-
dained tonsure disciples that voiced the disciples' support for their
two masters' plan (Siming Zunzhe jiaoxing lu T
46.909a-910a, 910a-c; Getz 1994, 139-141). Thus the monks most
likely to have the opportunity to take over the abbacy of the Yan-
qing Monastery under the hereditary system agreed to relinquish
their rights to it. In light of the remark in the Classified Legal Articles
cited above, it would seem that the agreement of the students to the
conversion not only strengthened the petition but was a legal re-
quirement.20
One might well wonder what would persuade especially the
younger generation in a tonsure family to give up its monastery
and face an uncertain future. In the case of Yanqing Monastery,
it seems the sheer charismatic force of someone like Zhili could
move tonsure disciples to give up what might otherwise have been
theirs. But even Zhili and Yiwen were concerned about their ton-
sure disciples' willingness to give up their rights. They feared that
once the two of them were gone, their tonsure disciples might try
to claim back the abbacy, causing Yanqing Monastery to revert to
the hereditary system. This is evidenced by an oath Zhili and Yiwen
composed and asked their tonsured disciples to take, which stated
that the disciples under no circumstances would take over the ab-
bacy after their masters' deaths, even if one of them was the most
qualified person that could be found (T 46.907c; Getz 1994, 143-
147).
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 17 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 151
In fact many, and perhaps most, conversions of hereditary mon-
asteries into public ones did not happen voluntarily. The Classified
Legal Articles includes various laws that show how relatively easy it
was for the state to force the conversion of hereditary monasteries.
If a monastery was found to harbor criminals, it could be turned
into a public institution (fasc. 50.477a). Likewise, if no successor
was at hand in a hereditary monastery, it would automatically be
converted into a public abbacy, as would a monastery that had be-
come dilapidated and been abandoned (fasc. 50.476a). Further-
more, as was the case with the appointment of abbots to public
monasteries, important monasteries would often be converted into
public institutions by the government or by high-ranking local offi-
cials simply by decree.21
Besides pressure from the state and powerful officials on hered-
itary monasteries to convert to public ones, other forces were at work.
In the wars that followed the fall of the Tang, many monasteries were
damaged and lost their land holdings; their tonsure families were
dispersed. Among the monasteries that continued to operate many
must have become almost fully dependent on local lay supporters.
These supporters of course had little interest in patronizing a hered-
itary monastery, and they must at times have been able to force
their institution to adopt the system of public abbacies. There is ev-
idence for this in a text by the literatus Yu Jing Ain (1000-1064)
dated to 1038, which describes the succession of abbots at the Puli
^flj Monastery at Dongshan MIA Its abbacy had first been occu-
pied by the "founder" of the Caodong tradition of Chan, Dongshan
Liangjie M I AA (807-869). The text implies that at the time of
writing the Puli Monastery was a public Chan monastery, although
nothing is said about when the conversion took place. According to
the text, in the generations after Liangjie the abbacy was passed on
from master to disciple, clearly (although this is not stated) in a ton-
sure relationship. However, during the Five Dynasties period (907-
960), which followed the breakdown of the Tang, this system seems
to have been disrupted. When the area came under the control of
the Southern Tang (937-958) regime, the king ordered a certain
monk to take up the abbacy. Later, perhaps at the beginning of the
Song, another abbot (it is not clear how he came into the position)
wanted his disciple to take over the abbacy after him. The lay sup-
porters of the monastery objected, and another monk was chosen
(Yunzhou Dongshan Puli chanyuan chuanfa ji fA'HMH^f'J^l^^
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 18 ---
152 Morten Schlutter
ABB, fasc. 9.14b-18b, in Siku quanshu zhenben 6).
The main forces in converting a monastery from hereditary to pub-
lic in the Song, aside from those of the state, must thus have been
lay supporters from the local elite and local officials. These groups
gained from having a prestigious monastery in their area, and they
would often have been in a position to apply pressure on hereditary
monasteries to convert.
The efforts to convert monasteries from hereditary to public
were very successful. As mentioned above, by the end of the North-
ern Song about half of all registered monasteries were public. Al-
though the total number of hereditary monasteries would be much
higher if one were to include unregistered monasteries, which had
proliferated greatly by this time, the proportion of public monas-
teries to hereditary ones was still remarkably high.
Vinaya Monasteries and Chan Monasteries
In public monasteries the abbacy was supposed to be open to any
competent candidate, but with an important qualification. Most,
and possibly all, public monasteries in the Song had an official as-
sociation with a particular tradition within Buddhism, and their
abbacies were restricted to lineage holders in that tradition. At first
public monasteries all seem to have been associated with the Chan
tradition, but early in the Song public monasteries associated with
the Tiantai school came into existence and later some public mon-
asteries became affiliated with the Huayan ^^ school. In the late
Southern Song, public Tiantai and Huayan monasteries were classi-
fied as teaching (jiao or jiang p) monasteries. Also in the South-
ern Song, a further category of public vinaya (lu #) monasteries ap-
peared. These were monasteries associated with the newly emerged
Vinaya school of Buddhism.
One of the most intriguing aspects of the Song system of hered-
itary and public monasteries is the special connection between the
institution of public monasteries and the Chan school. Not only
were public monasteries in the beginning all affiliated with the
Chan school, but even after public teaching monasteries had be-
come common the system of public abbacies continued to be espe-
cially associated with the Chan school. Another important point to
be made here is that the term "lUsi" ## (vinaya monastery) origi-
nally was a designation for hereditary monasteries and had no con-
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 19 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 153
nection whatsoever with the later public vinaya monasteries associ-
ated with the Vinaya school. These two points are closely related:
Because public abbacies began with the Chan school and hereditary
monasteries were called "vinaya monasteries," the conversion of a
hereditary monastery into a public Chan monastery is often de-
scribed in Song sources as a change from Vinaya to Chan. This has
been almost universally understood to mean that the monastery in
question changed its affiliation from the Vinaya school to the Chan
school, a serious misinterpretation that obscures the nature of the
system of public and hereditary monasteries as well as the history
of the Vinaya school.
Several sources attest to the special relationship between the in-
stitution of public abbacies and the Chan school on the one hand
and the use of "vinaya monastery" for "hereditary monastery" on
the other. Consider, for example, an inscription for the Lingfeng g
|| Monastery at Mount Dahong A A ("Da Song Suizhou Dahong-
shan Lingfeng Chansi ji" written by the
famous statesman Zhang Shangying (1043-1121) in 1102
(Hubei jinshi zhi fasc. 10.7b-10b, in Shike shiliao xin-
bian S M ^ M, 1.16; cf. Ishii Shudo, 1987, 430-437). Zhang
reports that in the fall of 1087 the Lingfeng Monastery was by im-
perial command changed from Vinaya to Chan, and in 1094 mem-
bers of the Outer Censorate asked to have the monk Dahong Baoen
AAISM. (1058-1111) moved there to take up the abbacy. Then,
Zhang says, in 1102 he was asked to write a "Record of [Becoming]
a Public Chan Monastery" for the Lingfeng Monastery. Zhang goes
on to relate that a disciple of the famous Chan master Mazu Mffl.
(707-786, or 709-788), known as Great Master Ciren Lingji MMM
first became abbot of the Lingfeng Monastery during the
Yuanhe Afn period (806-820) of the Tang. After a description of
the monastery and its history Zhang states that, after having com-
pared and analyzed Chan and Vinaya, he came to the following
conclusion:
Vinaya uses [hereditary] succession (jiayi) and Chan uses the public
(shifang) [system]. That which is called "succession" means that where
one generation (jia) is coming from, that is where the next generation
(yi) establishes itself. So [at the time before Lingfeng Monastery be-
came public] they would necessarily say: "We are the sons and grand-
sons of Ciren [the founder of Lingfeng]." Now that a person [to be the
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 20 ---
154 Morten Schlutter
abbot] is selected publicly the descendants of Ciren have been cut off.
(Hubei jinshi zhi, fasc. 10.9b)
Here Zhang Shangyin describes the Lingfeng Monastery's new des-
ignation as a public Chan monastery as a change from Vinaya to
Chan. He explicitly identifies vinaya monasteries with hereditary
succession and Chan monasteries with public abbacies. In explain-
ing how the vinaya system works, Zhang describes how previously
those who were abbots at Lingfeng would be the descendants of
the monastery's founder, Ciren. But because the monastery had
now become public, Ciren's descendants had lost their rights to the
abbacy.
First of all, this shows that, as T. Griffith Foulk has already sug-
gested, in the Northern Song the designation "vinaya monastery''
did not mean a monastery with an abbacy that was held by mem-
bers of a Vinaya school.22 Rather, "vinaya" in this context simply
seems to mean "governed by the vinaya.'' A vinaya monastery is,
therefore, an ordinary hereditary monastery.23 Zhang's statement
also shows that even if a monastery had some sort of connection to
the Chan lineage through its tonsure family (as was the case with
Lingfeng Monastery), it was still a vinaya monastery because the
succession to its abbacy was hereditary and stayed within the
tonsure family. This statement further drives home the point that
"vinaya monastery'' in this context has no association whatsoever
with a Vinaya school. Another important point to note here is that
Zhang Shangyin in the inscription above seems to associate public
abbacies exclusively with the Chan school. As we have already seen,
and as Zhang must have known, a number of non-Chan public
monasteries were in existence at the time he wrote his record of
the Lingfeng Monastery in 1102. However, Zhang must have felt
that Chan was associated with the system of public monasteries in
a special way to write as he did.
Ironically, perhaps the earliest evidence of a special relationship
between Chan and public abbacies is found in the 1010 petition re-
ferred to earlier by Zhili and Yiwen. In this petition Zhili and Yiwen
note that the prefecture already had two monasteries with public
abbacies, the Jingde Monastery at Mount Tiantong and
the Xianju ffg Monastery at Mount Damei A^. According to
them, these institutions were based on the "model of the Buddhist
monasteries'' in the Jiangnan (most of modern Anhui and
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 21 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 155
Jiangxi provinces) and Hunan circuits (Siming Zunzhe jiaoxing lu, T
46.909c2-5, 909c26-28; Getz 1994, 139-159). The Baoqing Siming
zhi ^ f t H ^A reports that the Jingde Monastery received a name
plaque in 1007 and the Xianju Monastery had one bestowed in
1008 (Baoqing Siming zhi, fasc. 13.18b, in Song Yuan difang zhi con-
gshu 8). The monasteries must have become public at this point and
been designated Chan, but the Baoqing Siming zhi makes no men-
tion of that. However, the Tiansheng Era Expanded Record of the
Lamp (Tiansheng guangdeng lu ASSlSM, Z 2B.8.435c, hereafter
Expanded Record), a Chan genealogical history first published in
1036, mentions that the Chan master Basheng Qingjian AS^ffi
(957-1014) late in his life became the abbot at Tiantong. It would
seem that Qingjian must have become the abbot at Tiantong very
soon after it had become public. At Mount Damei, perhaps the first
Chan abbot was Damei Juxu A^gPA who, according to the
Expanded Record (Z 2B.8.445a), gained his position there in the
Xiangfu ## period (1008-1016). All this suggests that Tiantong
and Damei around the time of Zhili's petition were in fact public
Chan monasteries. In any event, there is ample evidence from later
in the Song that both Tiantong and Damei were famous public
Chan monasteries, and it seems likely that at the time they received
their new plaques they were converted to public Chan monasteries.
We should also note that Zhili and Yiwen's petition does not cite
any examples of public monasteries devoted to the Tiantai teach-
ings, which suggests that there were none at the time. The 1010
petition leaves the impression that, until then, whatever public
monasteries existed had been designated Chan.
The association between Chan and the institution of public
abbacies is made further explicit in Yu Jing's previously mentioned
text from 1038, which describes the succession of abbots at the
Dongshan Puli Monastery:
In recent times there has been a twofold division of Chan and Vinaya,
based on the [selection of] the abbot in residence. In Chan [monas-
teries] he is chosen according to virtue (de in vinaya [monasteries]
according to family relationship (qin [i.e., tonsure family]. (Wuxi ji
fasc. 9.14b, in Siku quanshu zhenben 6).
Again vinaya monasteries are identified with the hereditary system,
and Chan is presented as synonymous with the system of public
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 22 ---
156 Morten Schlutter
abbacies. Much additional evidence can be found in Song sources.
For example, in an inscription for the Fuyan Monastery, which
became public in 1050, it is said several times that disciples agreed
to turn their hereditary monastery into a public one, after which au-
thorities were petitioned. The inscription then states that there are
not two ways in Buddhism but that Chan and Vinaya are distin-
guished by the different living arrangements monks have in mon-
asteries. Monasteries where living is communal and where monks
are not asked whether they have a "family" connection are called
public. Monasteries where monks live in their own rooms and
call each other "sons" and "brothers" are called hereditary (jiayi)
("Fuyan chanyuan ji" IHS^l^fB, Zhiyuan Jiahe zhi AA^AA,
fasc. 26, 7b-9a, in Song Yuan difangzhi congshu A AAA A S* 12).
Even in the late twelfth century, when public monasteries desig-
nated Chan were only slightly more numerous than those desig-
nated teaching or Vinaya, the tendency to associate Chan with the
system of public abbacies continued. A late Song inscription relates
how a monastery became public in 1177 and then describes this
change as one from Vinaya to Chan ("Jingyan chansi ji" ^ M ^A
fB, Zhiyuan Jiahe zhi, fasc. 18.1b, in Song Yuan difangzhi congshu
12). It should also be noted that even after public vinaya monas-
teries appeared, the term "vinaya monastery" continued to be used
for hereditary monasteries, so it was necessary to distinguish be-
tween public and hereditary vinaya monasteries (e.g., Baoqing sim-
ing zhi, fasc. 11, 6a-11d, in Song Yuan difangzhi congshu 8).
It is safe to conclude that when a Song text mentions that a
monastery was changed from Vinaya to Chan, it means that it
went from being a monastery with a hereditary abbacy to one that
was public and reserved for members of the Chan lineage. However,
the granting of a plaque giving a monastery a name that contained
the word "Chan monastery" (Chansi ^A, or Chanyuan did
not necessarily mean that the monastery was converted into a pub-
lic Chan monastery.24 Likewise, a monastery designated as a public
Chan monastery did not necessarily have the words "Chan monas-
tery" in its official name.
Because public monasteries in the early part of the Song were
exclusively associated with the Chan school at the time, no further
classification was needed. However, perhaps beginning with Zhili's
petition in 1010, public monasteries officially reserved for members
of the Tiantai school came into existence. This eventually led to a
formal distinction between public Chan monasteries, and public
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 23 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 157
teaching monasteries that were associated with the Tiantai school
or the Huayan school that emerged in the eleventh century. A law
from 1145 (reformulated in 1154) concerning the taxation of monks
has different rates for monks living in hereditary vinaya and public
teaching monasteries and those living in public Chan monasteries,
making it clear that the distinction by this time had become official
(Song huiyao jigao, fasc. 127.4998a-c; cited in Eichhorn 1968, 35;
cf. Takao 1975, 66-67, and Gernet 1995, 34-35).25
However, neither the 1145 or 1154 law nor any earlier source
mentions public vinaya monasteries. It seems that this category
only appeared in the thirteenth century, and public vinaya monas-
teries were never very numerous.26 According to the Japanese foun-
der of the Soto Zen WM school, Dogen MA (1200-1253), who
visited China from 1223 to 1227, public vinaya monasteries were as-
sociated with a lineage claiming descent from the famous Chinese
vinaya master Daoxuan M^ (596-667).27 The Song Vinaya school
has not been well studied and it is unclear when it took shape, al-
though it seems that the monk Yuanzhao AM (1048-1116) was
instrumental in the early stages of its formation (see Getz in this
volume). However, it is certain that references to vinaya monas-
teries in Northern Song sources do not imply the existence a Vinaya
school at the time.
Conclusion
Government policies had a profound impact on the shape and de-
velopment of Buddhism during the Song, when monastic Bud-
dhism experienced a tremendous growth. What especially charac-
terizes the period is the proliferation of monasteries with public
abbacies and the great success of the Chan school, which became
the dominant school of monastic Buddhism in the Song and later.
The rise of Chan can now be understood to a large degree as a result
of the Song government's policies, or at least as a development that
could not have taken place without these policies. No doubt the
Song government had not directly aimed at advancing the Chan
school. But because Chan from an early point had a special associ-
ation with the system of public abbacies and the Song government
saw an advantage in having monasteries become public, Chan mon-
asteries flourished. Such policies allowed the Chan school to de-
velop an institutional base and an independent identity that gave
further validity to its claim as heir to a special transmission going
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 24 ---
158 Morten Schlutter
back all the way to the historical Buddha. This assertion probably
contributed to Chan's popularity among the elite and further helped
convince the Song government that the proliferation of Chan mon-
asteries was beneficial to the state. In any case, it seems doubtful
that Chan could have developed as an independent entity, with its
distinct literature and carefully constructed history, if it had not
been for the institution of public monasteries.
If the flourishing of the Chan school in the Song can only
be fully understood in the context of the state's promotion of pub-
lic monasteries, then the study of the Vinaya school can only be
fruitful if the association of the term "vinaya" with hereditary
monasteries is understood. The mention of vinaya monasteries in
sources dating to the Song and earlier has long been taken to mean
monasteries associated with a Vinaya school, and only T. Griffith
Foulk (1993) has suspected the fallacy of this assumption. The evi-
dence, however, clearly shows that the term "vinaya monastery'' in
Song sources usually refers to hereditary monasteries; only in cases
where it is made clear that the institution in question was public
can "vinaya monastery'' be associated with the Vinaya school.
Notes
1. The regulations the Song government imposed on the Buddhist church and
its clergy were also applied to monastic Daoism and were well in line with the rules
that existed for the rest of Song society. For in-depth discussion of the social control
exercised by the Song state, see McKnight 1992.
2. Thus in 778 an official proposed that all monasteries without plaques be de-
stroyed (Jiu Tang shu fasc. 127.3579; cited in Gernet 1995, 45).
3. See Nitto guho junrei koki fasc. 4, year 844, 7th moon, 15th
day (in Bai 1992, 446; cited in Weinstein 1987a, 126; cf. Gernet 1995, 45, 304).
4. The Latter Zhou occupied from 951 the area of China that stretched from
Peking in the north to the Yangzi River in the south. It is said that during the repres-
sion 30,336 monasteries were destroyed and only 2,694 monasteries were spared
(Chikusa 1982, 84).
5. According to Hansen (1990, 85), temples for popular gods under the South-
ern Song were not necessarily considered illegal even if they were not registered.
Registration was a final measure of accreditation for a cult. It is possible that the sit-
uation for small Buddhist monasteries was similar.
6. These monasteries would, however, usually claim to have been established
during earlier dynasties (Chikusa 1982, 100).
7. On the other hand, because the orders to dismantle plaque-less monasteries
were seldom carried out, these smaller monasteries could continue their unofficial
existence without being subject to government regulations and interference. Such
unregulated monasteries seem to have become numerous by the end of the Song
(Chikusa 1982, 103).
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 25 ---
Vinaya Monasteries and Public Abbacies 159
8. As in a family descent group, the dharma relatives in the tonsure family had
inheritance rights to each other's personal property (Classified Legal Articles, fasc.
51.487a).
9. The Song system of the abbot as the single head of a monastery did not come
into existence until, at the earliest, the end of the Tang. In the Tang and probably ear-
lier, monasteries were governed by the "three supervisors": the dean (shangzuo i j),
the abbot (sizhu A^)> and the overseer (duweina ^IIS). Among these it seems the
dean was the most powerful. The abbot system may first have been instituted within
the Chan school (Xie et al. 1990, 174; Gernet 1995, 8).
10. See the entry on the Classified Legal Articles by W. Eichhorn (in Hervouet,
1978, 180-181). The Buddhism and Daoism section of the Classified Legal Articles is
reproduced and translated into German in Eichhorn 1968.
11. The proliferation of new monasteries in the Song may have been partly
driven by the need to create new opportunities for those who were not likely to re-
ceive an abbacy by default, and many of the new monasteries were probably built as
branches of existing ones.
12. A note in the Classified Legal Articles (fasc. 50.476d) seems to indicate that a
class of hereditary monasteries existed where there was no clear concept of an ex-
tended tonsure family and where the abbacy primarily was passed from master to
disciple. Based on this passage Takao (1975, 74 n. 4) argues that a distinction must
be made between jiayi (succession) monasteries, where each generation had to be
exhausted before the abbacy could be passed on to the next, and tudi (disciple) mon-
asteries, where the abbacy passed from master to disciple. I have not found any evi-
dence for this use of terminology.
13. This is indicated in a 1332 inscription for a Daoist temple (Liangzhe jinshi
zhi fasc. 17.9b-10, in Shike shiliao xinbian SMiftfAM, ser. 1.14; cited
in Takao 1975, 63).
14. In the Southern Song another class of monasteries became common: pri-
vate grave monasteries. These were owned by wealthy families and charged with
looking after the family graves. It must be assumed that the abbots of such monas-
teries commonly were appointed by the family owning them (Chikusa 1982, 111-43;
Huang 1989, 241-300).
15. There are indications that some monasteries had a system of public abba-
cies in the Five Dynasties period (see below), and throughout Chinese history there
are reports of monks being appointed directly to monasteries by imperial command.
Takao (1975, 61) states that public monasteries did exist in the Tang but does not
elaborate. Foulk (1993) states that public monasteries began in the late Tang and
were continued on a local level during the Five Dynasties period, but he offers no ev-
idence. Song sources mention at least two monasteries that are said to have attained
official public status under the Tang, but both cases can probably be discounted
(Getz 1994, 134 n. 17, 154 n. 71).
16. The Pure Rules for Chan Monasteries does not specify the administrative
level of the officials involved, but it would seem that it must have been prefectural,
as in the Classified Legal Articles.
17. Ishikawa Shigeo (1988) maintains that from the beginning of the Song
there existed a formal category of monasteries whose abbacies were filled only by im-
perial appointment. This he bases on the Classified Legal Articles (fasc. 50.476b),
which states that abbacies which in the past had been appointed by imperial order
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 26 ---
160 Morten Schlutter
or proclamation can only be filled by first petitioning the central government; all
others go through the prefectural authorities. However, at many monasteries the
Song court only occasionally appointed the abbot, indicating that no formal system
was in place, at least for most of the Song.
18. Thus the Chan master Zhenjing Kewen HA^A (1025-1102) is reported to
have complained that in his day people would praise an abbot for not appropriating
monastic property—as if that were something extraordinary (Chanlin baoxun
#11, T 48.1021c).
19. The Songshi (30.10391; cited in Chikusa 1982, 162) tells of an official
who, when he became prefect of Fujian in 1077, observed that monks were compet-
ing to become abbots at public monasteries and that bribes were common.
20. The Yanqing yuan is in other ways an unusual case. It had originally been
turned over to Zhili and Yiwen by its previous abbots, apparently under the condition
that it should henceforth be a public monastery devoted to Tiantai teachings (Siming
Zunzhe jiaoxing lu B^W^^JM, T 46.909a; cited in Getz 1994, 139). It is not clear
how the previous abbots possessed the power to pass the monastery on to someone
who was not in their tonsure family or decide it should be a public monastery.
21. For example, in the Liangzhe jinshi zhi (fasc. 10.50b, in Shike shiliao xinbian,
ser. 1.14) we find a late-Southern Song stele entitled "Chongjian Jingshan Xingsheng
wanshou chansi zhiji'' SMff which records that in 1090 the pre-
fect of Hangzhou changed the monastery at Jingshan into a public institution. There
is no mention of anyone having petitioned for this.
22. Foulk (1993, 166) states: "The designation 'Vinaya monastery' in the North-
ern Sung did not apply to public monasteries and thus does not seem to have had
anything to do with membership in a Vinaya lineage as such. The term simply refers
to monasteries regulated by the Vinaya, that is, ordinary Buddhist monasteries where
no particular precedence was given to Ch'an or T'ien-t'ai monks.'' Foulk, however,
offers no evidence for this.
23. As Foulk (1993, 166) points out, this clearly is the meaning of the statement
that Chan monks originally lived in Vinaya monasteries found in the ''monastic rules''
attributed to Baizhang Huaihai WA'IS^ (749-814). See the Jingde chuandeng lu
•ffSM, T 51.251c.
24. Foulk (1987, 94, n. 6) notes that in the Tang, ''Chan'' in the name of a mon-
astery did not imply any connection with the Chan school. However, this is also true
during the Song.
25. Interestingly, monks in Chan monasteries were taxed less than the others.
Kenneth Ch'en (1956) suggests, implausibly, that this was because they were thought
to engage in productive labor and therefore not considered parasites to the degree
other monks were.
26. See the chart in Takao 1975 (67), which shows that public Vinaya monas-
teries made up only a small fraction of the total.
27. See Dogen's diary from China, the Hokyaki (Kodera 1980, 244, trans-
lation p. 130). Dogen describes the division of public monasteries into Chan, teach-
ing, and Vinaya, in addition to the hereditary ''disciple'' monasteries. He exclusively
associates the teaching monasteries with the Tiantai school.
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:53:51 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms