--- Page 1 ---
CONTENTS
EDITORIAL NOTE vii
FOREWORD BY MARY DOUGLAS ix
Introduction 1
1 The Exchange of Gifts and the Obligation to
Reciprocate (Polynesia) 10
2 The Extension of this System
Liberality, Honour, Money 24
3 Survivals of these Principles in Ancient
Systems of Law and Ancient Economies 60
4 Conclusion 83
NOTES 108
NAME INDEX 192
SUBJECT INDEX 196
EBSCO Publishing: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES
71492; Mauss, Marcel, Douglas, Mary; The Gift : The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies Account:ehost.
.egdeltuoR
sicnarF
&
rolyaT
.2002
.wal
thgirypoc
elbacilppa
ro
.S.U
rednu
dettimrep
sesu
riaf
tpecxe
,rehsilbup
eht
morf
noissimrep
tuohtiw
mrof
yna
ni
decudorper
eb
ton
yaM
.devreser
sthgir
llA

--- Page 2 ---
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 3 ---
EDITORIAL NOTE
The North American Indian term ‘potlatch’ has been
retained in the translation. Various definitions of it are given
in the text: ‘system for the exchange of gifts’, (as a verb)
‘to feed, to consume’, ‘place of being satiated’ [Boas]. As
elaborated by Mauss, it consists of a festival where goods
and services of all kinds are exchanged. Gifts are made and
reciprocated with interest. There is a dominant idea of
rivalry and competition between the tribe or tribes
assembled for the festival, coupled occasionally with
conspicuous consumption.
The French terms ‘prestations’ and ‘contre-prestations’
have no direct English equivalents. They represent, in the
context in which they are used by Mauss, respectively the
actual act of exchange of gifts and rendering of services,
and the reciprocating or return of these gifts and services.
Normally they have been referred to in the translation for
brevity’s sake, as ‘total services’ and ‘total counter-
services’.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 4 ---
viii EDITORIAL NOTE
It has not proved possible to reinstate the original English of
the 170 quotations from English-language works, or presumed
as such, used by Mauss. These works are from British, American,
and Commonwealth sources and are often unidentifiable from
the references given in the footnotes.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 5 ---
FOREWORD
No free gifts
Mary Douglas
Charity is meant to be a free gift, a voluntary, unrequited
surrender of resources. Though we laud charity as a Christian
virtue we know that it wounds. I worked for some years in a
charitable foundation that annually was required to give away
large sums as the condition of tax exemption. Newcomers to
the office quickly learnt that the recipient does not like the giver,
however cheerful he be. This book explains the lack of gratitude
by saying that the foundations should not confuse their
donations with gifts. It is not merely that there are no free gifts
in a particular place, Melanesia or Chicago for instance; it is
that the whole idea of a free gift is based on a misunderstanding.
There should not be any free gifts. What is wrong with the so-
called free gift is the donor’s intention to be exempt from return
gifts coming from the recipient. Refusing requital puts the act
of giving outside any mutual ties. Once given, the free gift entails
no further claims from the recipient. The public is not deceived
by free gift vouchers. For all the ongoing commitment the free-
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 6 ---
x FOREWORD
gift gesture has created, it might just as well never have happened.
According to Marcel Mauss that is what is wrong with the free
gift. A gift that does nothing to enhance solidarity is a
contradiction.
Mauss says as much in reply to Bronislaw Malinowski who
was surprised to find such precisely calculated return gifts in
Melanesia. He evidently took with him to his fieldwork the idea
that commerce and gift are two separate kinds of activity, the first
based on exact recompense, the second spontaneous, pure of
ulterior motive. Because the valuable things that circulated in the
Trobriand Islands and a vast surrounding region were not in
commercial exchange, he expected the transfers to fall into the
category of gifts in his own culture. So he expended a lot of care
in classifying gifts by the purity of the motives of the giver and
concluded that practically nothing was given freely in this sense,
only the small gift that a Trobriand husband regularly gave his
wife could count. ‘Pure gift? Nonsense!’ declares Mauss: the
Trobriand husband is actually recompensing his wife for sexual
services. He would have said ‘Nonsense!’ just as heartily to Titmus’s
idea that the archetypal pure-gift relationship is the anonymous
gift of blood,1 as if there could be an anonymous relationship.
Even the idea of a pure gift is a contradiction. By ignoring the
universal custom of compulsory gifts we make our own record
incomprehensible to ourselves: right across the globe and as far
back as we can go in the history of human civilization, the major
transfer of goods has been by cycles of obligatory returns of gifts.
Though this insight was taken up by archeologists and
historians for reinterpreting antique systems of tax, revenues,
and trade2, a fancy archeological insight was not Mauss’s objective.
The Essay on the Gift was a part of an organized onslaught on
contemporary political theory, a plank in the platform against
utilitarianism. This intention is fully recognized in the new journal,
MAUSS.3 Mauss himself wrote very little about political philosophy
but The Gift does not spring from nowhere; references to Emile
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 7 ---
FOREWORD xi
Durkheim make quite clear where to look for the rest of the
programme. And nor does Durkheim come from nowhere. First,
I will explain the plan of the book, then I will place it in its
context. Finally, I will indicate some of the work that has stemmed
from it, and suggest what is still to be done to implement the
original programme.
In this book the author has produced an idea that he has
probably been mulling over for a long time. Indeed, the idea is
profoundly original. We have seen how it runs against our
established idea of gift. The book starts with describing the North
American potlatch as an extreme form of an institution that is
found in every region of the world. The potlatch is an example of
a total system of giving. Read this too fast and you miss the
meaning. Spelt out it means that each gift is part of a system of
reciprocity in which the honour of giver and recipient are engaged.
It is a total system in that every item of status or of spiritual or
material possession is implicated for everyone in the whole
community. The system is quite simple; just the rule that every
gift has to be returned in some specified way sets up a perpetual
cycle of exchanges within and between generations. In some cases
the specified return is of equal value, producing a stable system
of statuses; in others it must exceed the value of the earlier gift,
producing an escalating contest for honour. The whole society
can be described by the catalogue of transfers that map all the
obligations between its members. The cycling gift system is the
society.
The Gift is a grand exercise in positivist research, combining
ethnology, history, and sociology. First Mauss presents the system
as found in working order. This takes him to the ethnography of
North America. What is striking about the potlatch among the
Haïda and Tlingit of the Northwest coast is the extreme rivalry
expressed by the rule always to return more than was received;
failure to return means losing the competition for honour. There
comes a point when there are just not enough valuable things to
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 8 ---
xii FOREWORD
express the highest degrees of honour, so conspicuous
consumption is succeeded by conspicuous destruction. Then he
turns to Melanesia where, in a less extreme form, there are the
essentials of potlatch, that is, totalized competitive giving that
incorporates in its cycles all things and services and all persons.
He treats Polynesia as a variant, because there the totalized giving
does not presume rivalry between donor and recipient. When
the paths of Polynesian gifts are traced, a stable, hierarchical
structure is revealed. It is not the competitive potlatch, but it is
still a total system of gift. Where does the system get its energy?
In each case from individuals who are due to lose from default
heaping obloquy on defaulters and from beliefs that the spirits
would punish them. The system would not be total if it did not
include personal emotions and religion.
After presenting the system of gift functioning among
American Indians and in Oceania, and among Eskimo and
Australian hunters, Mauss then turns to records of ancient legal
systems. Roman, Germanic, and other Indo-European laws all
show signs of the basic principles. There are no free gifts; gift
cycles engage persons in permanent commitments that articulate
the dominant institutions. Only after the full tour of ethnographic
and legal evidence do we finally reach the chapter on the theory
of the gift in classical Hindu law. Now we have definitely moved
away from working social systems to myths, legends, and
fragments of laws: not the system of gift but, as the chapter
heading says, the theory of gift. Mauss’s early book with Henri
Hubert (1889) on Sacrifice4 took for its central theme a Vedic
principle that sacrifice is a gift that compels the deity to make a
return: Do ut des; I give so that you may give. Given the centrality
of India in Max Muller’s philological speculations on mythology,
any book at that time on religion would need to study Hindu law
and epic deeply. It strikes me as likely that Mauss did get the idea
of a morally sanctioned gift cycle upholding the social cycle from
the Vedic literature that he studied in that first major research. I
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 9 ---
FOREWORD xiii
am inclined to think that he harboured and developed the great
idea all those years. Certainly there is a close connection of matter
and treatment between the two books.
In some histories of anthropology the main difference
between old-fashioned folklore and modern ethnography has
been identified as the replacement of library research by
fieldwork. But I would suggest that the main important change
came from a new criterion of sound analysis. The Gift was like an
injunction to record the entire credit structure of a community.
What a change that involved from current ideas about how to
do ethnology can be seen by reading any of the earlier books
cited in the voluminous footnotes whose unsystematic accounts
of beliefs and ceremonies provided the uninterpreted bare bones
of the gift system.
Because it starts from Northwest Coast American Indians and
Melanesians and goes on to Polynesia and then to ancient texts,
the book would seem to spring from the fusty debates of library
researchers on comparative religion. Yet it is not about religion. It
is about politics and economics. After the survey of evidence come
the political and moral implications. Following Durkheim, Mauss
also considered that every serious philosophical work should bear
on public policy. The theory of the gift is a theory of human
solidarity. Consequently, a brief reference to contemporary debates
on health and unemployment insurance is in place, with the
argument deduced from the preceding pages that the wage does
not cover society’s obligation to the worker. No obligations are
ever completely covered. Though Mauss here refers approvingly
to some English proposals on social policy, he is writing in a
tradition strongly opposed to English liberal thought. At this point
the Durkheimian context needs to be filled in.
The main strands in Durkheim’s opposition to the English
Utilitarians were already formulated by French political
philosophers.5 As Larry Siedentrop summarizes a tradition that
stemmed from the eighteenth century, from Rousseau and
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 10 ---
xiv FOREWORD
Tocqueville, it made three criticisms of English liberalism: first,
that it was based on an impoverished concept of the person seen
as an independent individual instead of as a social being; second,
that it neglected how social relations change with changes in the
mode of production; and third, that it had a too negative concept
of liberty and so failed to appreciate the moral role of political
participation. Furthermore, early English empiricist philosophy
did not explain the role of social norms in shaping individual
intentions and in making social action possible; their sensationalist
model of the mind allowed no scope for explaining rule-governed
action. Individualism is the essence of the French critique of
utilitarianism. This is exactly where Durkheim’s life work starts,
as would appear from comparing his writings with the following
paragraph by his biographer, Steven Lukes:6
Benjamin Constant believed that ‘when all are isolated by egoism,
there is nothing but dust, and at the advent of a storm, nothing but
mire’,7 while it was Alexis de Tocqueville who gave individualisme its
most distinctive and influential liberal meaning in France. For
Tocqueville it meant the apathetic withdrawal of individuals from
public life into a private sphere and their isolation from one another,
with a consequent and dangerous weakening of social bonds:
individualism was
a deliberate and peaceful sentiment which disposes each citizen
to isolate himself from the mass of his fellows… [which] at first
saps only the virtues of public life, but, in the long run…attacks
and destroys all others and is eventually absorbed into pure
egoism.8
(Lukes, 1973)
Among French socialists individualism was a bad word, referring
to laissez faire, anarchy, social atomization, and exploitation of the
poor under a regime of industrial capitalism. However,
Durkheim’s position was more complex. He believed that the
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 11 ---
FOREWORD xv
success of a political system would depend on the extent to which
it allowed individual self-awareness to flourish. He tried to keep
a delicate balance between reproaching utilitarianism for
overlooking that humans are social beings and reproaching
socialism for overlooking the demands of the individual.
If one were to be forgetful of this traditional hostility to English
utilitarianism it would be easy to misunderstand Durkheim’s
language and to fall into the trap of thinking that he really believed
that society is a kind of separate intelligence that determines the
thoughts and actions of its members as the mind does those of
the body it is lodged in. Arguing against the nineteenth-century
forms of utilitarianism, especially against the political philosophy
of Herbert Spencer, it would have seemed hard for the anti-
utilitarians to overestimate the importance of shared norms. And
as for those whom he attacked, especially those across the Channel
or across the Atlantic, it was evidently easier to misrepresent him
than to disagree with what he was actually saying. Bartlett refers
to Durkheim’s idea of the collective memory as a quasimystic
soul; Herbert Simon dissociates himself from Durkheimian ‘group
mind’ implications; Alfred Schutz disdainfully dismisses
Halbwachs’ theories on the ‘Collective Memory of Musicians’
(which are very much the same as his own) because they are
tainted by Durkheim’s alleged theory of a unitary group
consciousness; see also Bruno Latour on Durkheim’s ‘big animal’.9
All these and many others forget that Durkheim’s work was
actually part of an ongoing research project with close
collaborators who quite clearly did not give it this interpretation.
So the counterattack has travestied versions of ‘group mind’,
‘mystical unit’, ‘group psyche’ that his language occasionally
justifies but his precepts as to method certainly do not. This is
why positivism was such an important plank in his programme.
Positivism represented an attempt at objectivity. This is why it
was necessary for Mauss to set out the plan of his book by
beginning with the survey of functioning social systems, ending
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 12 ---
xvi FOREWORD
with Hindu texts about a vanished system (or one that had perhaps
never existed in that form).
Today the same political debate is still engaged, between the
contemporary utilitarians and those who, like Durkheim, deplore
the effects of unfettered individualism. Some of those working
in learned communities that embrace methodological
individualism may be right to feel threatened by his teaching.
Personally, I think it would be better for them to take it seriously.
Hostility and a sense of threat are a sign that collective
representations are at work. Our problem is how to take our own
and other people’s collective representations into account.
Durkheim expected to do so by setting up sociology as a science,
using positivist methods and looking for social facts. Science was
to be a way of escaping bondage to past and to present loyalties.
It is easy to mock his scientific pretensions, but who would deny
that we really do need to seek for objectivity and to establish a
responsible sociological discourse free of subjective hunches and
concealed political pressure?
From this point of view The Gift rendered on extraordinary
service to Durkheim’s central project by producing a theory that
could be validated by observation. For anthropologists the book
has provided a basic requirement for modern fieldwork. It quickly
became axiomatic that a field report would be below standard
unless a complete account could be given of all transfers, that is,
of all dues, gifts, fines, inheritances and successions, tributes,
fees and payments; when this information is in place one also
knows who gets left at the end of the day without honour or
citizenship and who benefits from the cumulative transfers. With
such a chart in hand the interpreter might be capable of sensing
the meanings of ballads, calypsos, dirges, and litanies; without it
one guess will do as well as any other.
Mauss rendered other inestimable services to Durkheim’s
project of a science of sociology. One is to have demonstrated
that when the members of the Durkheimian school talked of
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 13 ---
FOREWORD xvii
society they did not mean an undecomposable unity, as many of
their critics have supposed. If they had thought of society as an
unanalysable, unchanging, sacralized entity, the researches of
Durkheim’s best pupils would never have been undertaken. The
Elementary Forms of the Religious Life10 gives snapshot pictures of
Australian aborigines and American Indians worshipping spirits
who sustain the social forms. It all seems very cut and dried.
Durkheim and Mauss in Primitive Classification,11 write as if categories
are never negotiated but always come ready tailored to fit the
institutions. Their argument at that point was not about change.
They did in fact have a theory of change, that is, that changes in
the organization of production radically transform the system of
categories and beliefs.12 If their theory had really been about a
static social system, there would not have been any point in
Maurice Halbwachs considering how public memory changes
when part of the population goes away, taking its memories with
it, or when a new influx comes bringing memories of their own
past to the common pool.13 Nor would Georges Davy have been
so interested in the conditions under which oath-breaking is
thought to be punished by God and those in which the sacredness
of the oath diminishes.14 It is an ignorant reading that supposes
that Durkheim and his colleagues were looking for static
correlations. The modern economy with its increasing
specialization of functions is the backdrop to all these
comparisons, and particularly to the gift system yielding place to
the industrial system.
Another of Mauss’s contributions to this collaborative effort is to
have introduced a realistic idea of individuals in the pre-market social
system where, according to Durkheim’s formulations, one might
expect only a community of humans mechanically connected to
one another by their unquestioning use of this same ideas. Durkheim
shared the common belief of his day in a gradual enriching and
unfolding of the personality as the collective representations loosened
their grip. However, Mauss manages to incorporate individuals acting
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 14 ---
xviii FOREWORD
in their own interests, even in the kinds of societies in which
Durkheim had thought that there was no scope for individual self-
interest. On this Mauss rightly remarks that the concept of interest is
itself modern.15 He introduces psychology into the new sociology
with essays on collective representations about death, about the body,
and about the person.16 In these he takes off from Durkheim’s ideas
and develops extended innovations upon them.
He also discovered a mechanism by which individual interests
combine to make a social system, without engaging in market
exchange. This is an enormous development beyond Durkheim’s
ideas of solidarity based on collective representations. The gift
cycle echoes Adam Smith’s invisible hand: gift complements
market in so far as it operates where the latter is absent. Like the
market it supplies each individual with personal incentives for
collaborating in the pattern of exchanges. Gifts are given in a
context of public drama, with nothing secret about them. In being
more directly cued to public esteem, the distribution of honour,
and the sanctions of religion, the gift economy is more visible
than the market. Just by being visible, the resultant distribution
of goods and services is more readily subject to public scrutiny
and judgements of fairness than are the results of market exchange.
In operating a gift system a people are more aware of what they
are doing, as shown by the sacralization of their institutions of
giving. Mauss’s fertile idea was to present the gift cycle as a
theoretical counterpart to the invisible hand. When
anthropologists search around for a telling distinction between
societies based on primitive and modern technologies, they try
out various terms such as pre-literate, simple, traditional. Each
has limitations that unfit it for general use. But increasingly we
are finding that the idea of the gift economy comprises all the
associations—symbolic, interpersonal, and economic—that we
need for comparison with the market economy.
When I try to consider what would be needed now to
implement Mauss’s original programme, I wonder which current
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 15 ---
FOREWORD xix
ideas would be replaced if The Gift were to be as significant as he
could have hoped. Where anthropology is concerned he would
surely be more than satisfied. Nothing has been the same since.
The big developments stem from this work. Before we had The
Gift’s message unfolded for us we anthropologists, if we thought
of the economy at all, treated it almost as a separate aspect of
society, and kinship as separate again, and religion as a final chapter
at the end. Evans-Pritchard, who promoted the original English
translation and wrote a foreword to the edition that this one
replaces, had Mauss’s teaching very much at heart when he
described the marriage dues of the Nuer as a strand in the total
circulation of cattle, and wives, and children, and men: every
single relationship had its substantiation in a gift.17 This was a
beginning, but there is no doubt that Claude Lévi-Strauss is the
most indebted, which means of course that he gave counter-gifts
as magnificent as he received. After The Elementary Forms of Kinship18
we had to count transfers of men and women as the most
important among the gifts in total symbolic systems. Numerous,
very fine, comparative studies stand as testimony to the
transformation of our outlook. However, it is not so easy to carry
forward these analyses and apply them to ourselves.
The problem now is the same as it was for Mauss when it
comes to applying his insights to contemporary, industrial society.
Yet this is what he wanted to see done. As the last chapter in this
volume shows, his own attempt to use the theory of the gift to
underpin social democracy is very weak. Social security and health
insurance are an expression of solidarity, to be sure, but so are a
lot of other things, and there the likeness ends. Social democracy’s
redistributions are legislated for in elected bodies and the sums
are drawn from tax revenues. They utterly lack any power mutually
to obligate persons in a contest of honour. Taking the theory
straight from its context in full-blown gift economies to a modern
political issue was really jumping the gun. His own positivist
method would require a great deal more patient spadework, both
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 16 ---
xx FOREWORD
on theory and in collecting new kinds of data. I myself made an
attempt to apply the theory of the gift to our consumption
behaviour, arguing that it is much more about giving than the
economists realize. Class structure would be clearly revealed in
information about giving within and exclusion from reciprocal
voluntary cycles of exchange. Much of the kind of information I
needed about what happens in our society was missing from
census and survey records.19 It was information that could have
been collected if Mauss’s theory was recognized. If we persist in
thinking that gifts ought to be free and pure, we will always fail
to recognize our own grand cycles of exchanges, which categories
get to be included and which get to be excluded from our
hospitality.20 More profound insights into the nature of solidarity
and trust can be expected from applying the theory of the gift to
ourselves. Though giving is the basis for huge industries, we
cannot know whether it is the foundation of a circulating fund
of stable esteem and trust, or of individualist competition as
Thorstein Veblen thought.21 We cannot know because the
information is not collected in such a way as to relate to the
issues.
I conclude by asking why this profound and original book
had its impact mainly on small professional bodies of
archeologists, classicists, and anthropologists. The answer might
be that the debate with the utilitarians that Mauss was ready to
enter before World War I had lost its excitement by the time he
published this volume. One of the most fascinating topics in
Lukes’s biography is the relation of Durkheim’s school to Marxism.
Before the war the real enemy, the open enemy of French political
philosophy, was Anglo-Saxon utilitarianism. After the war
utilitarianism became the narrow province of a specialized
discipline of economics. The political enemies of social democracy
became communism and fascism. I have remarked how they traced
a counterpoint to Marx’s central ideas, neutralizing them as it
were from communist taint and making something like Marxism
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 17 ---
FOREWORD xxi
safe for French democracy by diluting the revolutionary
component.22
The political mood of the interwar years was dominated by
concern for the erosion of civil liberties and excessive corporatist
claims on the individual.
Now, however, the fashion has changed again. Utilitarianism
is not just a technique of econometrics, nor a faded philosopy of
the eighteenth century. Solidarity has again become a central topic
in political philosophy. Social Darwinism walks again and the
survival of the fittest is openly invoked. Philosophically creaking
but technically shining, unified and powerful, utility theory is
the main analytical tool for policy decisions. However, its
intellectual assumptions are under attack. The French debate with
the Anglo-Saxons can start again. This time round the sparks from
Mauss’s grand idea might well light a fuse to threaten
methodological individualism and the idea of a free gift.
NOTES
1 R.Titmus (1970) The Gift Relationship, New York: Pantheon.
2 K.Polanyi, C.M.Arensberg, and H.W.Pearson (1957) Trade and Market in
Early Empires, Glencoe: Free Press.
3 An acronym for Mouvement Anti-utilitariste dans les Sciences Sociales (New
Series, vol. 1, 1988, La Découverte, Paris).
4 H.Hubert and M.Mauss (1899) ‘Essai sur la nature et la fonction du sacrifice’,
Année Sociologique, 2:29–138. (English translation by W.D. Halls, Sacrifice:
its Nature and Function, with a Foreword by E.E.Evans-Pritchard, Routledge,
London, 1964.)
5 L.Siedentrop (1979) ‘Two Liberal Traditions’ in A.Ryan (ed.) The Idea of
Freedom, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 153–74. Starting from Rousseau
in the eighteenth century, and with Condillac, Bonald, and Maistre, Larry
Siedentrop names as the nineteenth-century protagonists of this criticism
Madame de Staël, Benjamin Constant, and Les Doctrinaires. The latter
group included Guizot and de Tocqueville who took the critique of political
theory as an urgent post-revolutionary reform. There was more than a
touch of political reaction in the movement. The Doctrinaire theorists
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 18 ---
xxii FOREWORD
were strongly committed to the idea of hierarchy and the Doctrinaire
government (1815–20 and 1820–7) tried to restore the conditions of the
Ancien Régime.
6 S.Lukes (1973) Emile Durkheim, His Life and Work, London: Allen Lane pp.
197–8.
7 B.Constant quoted in Lukes (1973), himself quoting H.Marion (n.d.).
‘Individualisme’, in La Grande Encyclopédie, vol. xx, Paris.
8 A. de Tocqueville (1835–40) De la démocratie en Amérique, ii, 2, Ch. 11 in
Oeuvres Complètes, J.P.Mayer (ed.) (1951) Paris, t. 1, pt. 2:10.
9 Bartlett (1932) Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
H.Simon (1945) Administrative Behavior, A Study of Decision-making Processes
in Administrative Organisation, Glencoe: Free Press.
A.Schutz (1951) ‘Making Music Together’ in Collected Papers, 1–3, The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
B.Latour (1988) in review of Mary Douglas’s How Institutions Think,
Contemporary Sociology, an International Journal of Reviews: 383–5.
10 E.Durkheim (1912) Les Formes Elémentaires de la Vie Religieuse, Paris:
Alcan.
11 E.Durkheim and M.Mauss (1903) ‘De quelques formes primitives de
classification: contribution à l’etude des representations collectives’, l’Année
Sociologique 6.
12 E.Durkheim (1893) De la Division du Travail Social: étude sur l’organisation des
sociétés superieures, Paris: Alcan.
13 M.Halbwachs (1925) Les Cadres Sociaux de la Mémoire, Paris: Alcan.
14 G.Davy (1922) ‘La foi jurée’, Étude Sociologique du Problème du Contrat,
la Formation du lien contractuel, Paris. (English translation by W.D.Halls,
The Division of Labour in Society, Macmillan, London and New York,
1984.)
15 See A.Hirschman (1973) The Passions and the Interests, Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press:
16 M.Mauss (1926) ‘L’idée de mort’, Journal de Psychologie Normale et
Pathologique,
M.Mauss (1936) ‘Les techniques du corps’, Journal de Psychologie, 3–4.
17 E.E.Evans-Pritchard (1940) The Nuer: The Political Institutions of a Nilotic People,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
E.E.Evans-Pritchard (1951) Kinship and Marriage among the Nuer, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
18 C.Lévi-Strauss (1949) Les Structures Elémentaires de la Parenté, Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 19 ---
FOREWORD xxiii
19 M.Douglas (1978) The World of Goods, London: Basic Books and Penguin.
20 M.Douglas (ed.) (1984) Food in the Social Order, New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
21 T.Veblen (1928) The Theory of the Leisure Class, New York: Vanguard Press.
22 M.Douglas (1980) ‘Introduction: Maurice Halbwachs (1877–1945)’, The
Collective Memory, New York: Harper and Row.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 20 ---
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 21 ---
INTRODUCTION
THE GIFT, AND ESPECIALLY THE OBLIGATION
TO RETURN IT
Epigraph
Below we give a few stanzas from the Havamal, one of the old
poems of the Scandinavian Edda.1 They may serve as an epigraph
for this study, so powerfully do they plunge the reader into the
immediate atmosphere of ideas and facts in which our exposition
will unfold.2
(39) I have never found a man so generous
And so liberal in feeding his guests
That ‘to receive would not be received’,
Nor a man so…[the adjective is missing]
Of his goods
That to receive in return was disagreeable to
Him3
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 22 ---
2 THE GIFT
(41) With weapons and clothes
Friends must give pleasure to one another;
Everyone knows that for himself [through his
Own experience].
Those who exchange presents with one another
Remain friends the longest
If things turn out successfully.
(42) One must be a friend
To one’s friend,
And give present for present;
One must have
Laughter for laughter
And sorrow for lies
(44) You know, if you have a friend
In whom you have confidence
And if you wish to get good results
Your soul must blend in with his
And you must exchange presents
And frequently pay him visits.
(44) But if you have another person
(sic) Whom you mistrust
And if you wish to get good results,
You must speak fine words to him
But your thoughts must be false
And you must lament in lies.
(46) This is the way with him
In whom you have no trust
And whose sentiments you suspect,
You must smile at him
And speak in spite of yourself:
Presents given in return must be similar to
Those received.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 23 ---
INTRODUCTION 3
(47) Noble and valiant men
Have the best life;
They have no fear at all
But a coward fears everything:
The miser always fears presents.
Cahen also points out to us stanza 145:
(145)`It is better not to beg [ask for something]
Than to sacrifice too much [to the gods]:
A present given always expects one in return.
It is better not to bring any offering
Than to spend too much on it.
Programme
The subject is clear. In Scandinavian civilization, and in a good
number of others, exchanges and contracts take place in the form
of presents; in theory these are voluntary, in reality they are given
and reciprocated obligatorily.
The present monograph is a fragment of more extensive
studies. For years our attention has been concentrated on both
the organization of contractual law and the system of total
economic services operating between the various sections or
subgroups that make up so-called primitive societies, as well
as those we might characterize as archaic. This embraces an
enormous complex of facts. These in themselves are very
complicated. Everything intermingles in them, everything
constituting the strictly social life of societies that have
preceded our own, even those going back to protohistory. In
these ‘total’ social phenomena, as we propose calling them,
all kinds of institutions are given expression at one and the
same time—religious, juridical, and moral, which relate to
both politics and the family; likewise economic ones, which
suppose special forms of production and consumption, or
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 24 ---
4 THE GIFT
rather, of performing total services and of distribution. This is
not to take into account the aesthetic phenomena to which
these facts lead, and the contours of the phenomena that these
institutions manifest.
Among all these very complex themes and this multiplicity of
social ‘things’ that are in a state of flux, we seek here to study
only one characteristic—one that goes deep but is isolated: the
so to speak voluntary character of these total services, apparently
free and disinterested but nevertheless constrained and self-
interested. Almost always such services have taken the form of
the gift, the present generously given even when, in the gesture
accompanying the transaction, there is only a polite fiction,
formalism, and social deceit, and when really there is obligation
and economic self-interest. Although we shall indicate in detail
all the various principles that have imposed this appearance on a
necessary form of exchange, namely, the division of labour in
society itself—among all these principles we shall nevertheless
study only one in depth. What rule of legality and self-interest, in societies
of a backward or archaic type, compels the gift that has been received to be obligatorily
reciprocated? What power resides in the object given that causes its recipient to pay
it back? This is the problem on which we shall fasten more
particularly, whilst indicating others. By examining a fairly large
body of facts we hope to respond to this very precise question
and to point the way to how one may embark upon a study of
related questions. We shall also see to what fresh problems we are
led. Some concern a permanent form of contractual morality,
namely, how the law relating to things even today remains linked
to the law relating to persons. Others deal with the forms and
ideas that, at least in part, have always presided over the act of
exchange, and that even now partially complement the notion of
individual self-interest.
We shall thus achieve a dual purpose. On the one hand, we
shall arrive at conclusions of a somewhat archeological kind
concerning the nature of human transaction in societies around
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 25 ---
INTRODUCTION 5
us, or that have immediately preceded our own. We shall describe
the phenomena of exchange and contract in those societies that
are not, as has been claimed, devoid of economic markets—since
the market is a human phenomenon that, in our view, is not
foreign to any known society—but whose system of exchange is
different from ours. In these societies we shall see the market as
it existed before the institution of traders and before their main
invention—money proper. We shall see how it functioned both
before the discovery of forms of contract and sale that may be
said to be modern (Semitic, Hellenic, Hellenistic, and Roman),
and also before money, minted and inscribed. We shall see the
morality and the organization that operate in such transactions.
As we shall note that this morality and organization still
function in our own societies, in unchanging fashion and, so to
speak, hidden, below the surface, and as we believe that in this
we have found one of the human foundations on which our
societies are built, we shall be able to deduce a few moral
conclusions concerning certain problems posed by the crisis in
our own law and economic organization. There we shall call a
halt. This page of social history, of theoretical sociology, of
conclusions in the field of morality, and of political and economic
practice only leads us after all to pose once more, in different
forms, questions that are old but ever-new.4
Method
We have followed the method of exact comparison. First, as
always, we have studied our subject only in relation to specific
selected areas: Polynesia, Melanesia, the American Northwest,
and a few great legal systems. Next, we have naturally only chosen
those systems of law in which we could gain access, through
documents and philological studies, to the consciousness of
the societies themselves, for here we are dealing in words and
ideas. This again has restricted the scope of our comparisons.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 26 ---
6 THE GIFT
Finally, each study focused on systems that we have striven to
describe each in turn and in its entirety. Thus we have renounced
that continuous comparison in which everything is mixed up
together, and in which institutions lose all local colour and
documents their savour.5
THE RENDERING OF TOTAL SERVICES.
THE GIFT AND POTLATCH
The present study forms part of a series of researches that Davy
and myself have been pursuing for a long time, concerning the
archaic forms of contract.6 A summary of these is necessary.
Apparently there has never existed, either in an era fairly close
in time to our own, or in societies that we lump together
somewhat awkwardly as primitive or inferior, anything that might
resemble what is called a ‘natural’ economy.7 Through a strange
but classic aberration, in order to characterize this type of
economy, a choice was even made of the writings by Cook relating
to exchange and barter among the Polynesians.8 Now, it is these
same Polynesians that we intend to study here. We shall see how
far removed they are from a state of nature as regards law and
economics.
In the economic and legal systems that have preceded our own,
one hardly ever finds a simple exchange of goods, wealth, and
products in transactions concluded by individuals. First, it is not
individuals but collectivities that impose obligations of exchange
and contract upon each other.9 The contracting parties are legal
entities: clans, tribes, and families who confront and oppose one
another either in groups who meet face to face in one spot, or
through their chiefs, or in both these ways at once.10 Moreover,
what they exchange is not solely property and wealth, movable
and immovable goods, and things economically useful. In
particular, such exchanges are acts of politeness: banquets, rituals,
military services, women, children, dances, festivals, and fairs, in
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 27 ---
INTRODUCTION 7
which economic transaction is only one element, and in which
the passing on of wealth is only one feature of a much more
general and enduring contract. Finally, these total services and
counter-services are committed to in a somewhat voluntary form
by presents and gifts, although in the final analysis they are strictly
compulsory, on pain of private or public warfare. We propose to
call all this the system of total services. The purest type of such
institutions seems to us to be characterized by the alliance of two
phratries in Pacific or North American tribes in general, where
rituals, marriages, inheritance of goods, legal ties and those of
self-interest, the ranks of the military and priests—in short
everything, is complementary and presumes co-operation
between the two halves of the tribe. For example, their games, in
particular, are regulated by both halves.11 The Tlingit and the Haïda,
two tribes of the American Northwest, express the nature of such
practices forcefully by declaring that ‘the two tribal phratries show
respect to each other’.12
But within these two tribes of the American Northwest and
throughout this region there appears what is certainly a type of
these ‘total services’, rare but highly developed. We propose to
call this form the ‘potlatch’, as moreover, do American authors
using the Chinook term, which has become part of the everyday
language of Whites and Indians from Vancouver to Alaska. The
word potlatch essentially means ‘to feed’, ‘to consume’.13 These
tribes, which are very rich, and live on the islands, or on the
coast, or in the area between the Rocky Mountains and the coast,
spend the winter in a continual festival of feasts, fairs, and
markets, which also constitute the solemn assembly of the tribe.
The tribe is organized by hierarchical confraternities and secret
societies, the latter often being confused with the former, as
with the clans. Everything—clans, marriages, initiations,
Shamanist seances and meetings for the worship of the great
gods, the totems or the collective or individual ancestors of the
clan—is woven into an inextricable network of rites, of total
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 28 ---
8 THE GIFT
legal and economic services, of assignment to political ranks in
the society of men, in the tribe, and in the confederations of
tribes, and even internationally.14 Yet what is noteworthy about
these tribes is the principle of rivalry and hostility that prevails
in all these practices. They go as far as to fight and kill chiefs
and nobles. Moreover, they even go as far as the purely sumptuary
destruction of wealth that has been accumulated in order to
outdo the rival chief as well as his associate (normally a
grandfather, father-in-law, or son-in-law).15 There is total service
in the sense that it is indeed the whole clan that contracts on
behalf of all, for all that it possesses and for all that it does,
through the person of its chief16 But this act of ‘service’ on the
part of the chief takes on an extremely marked agonistic
character. It is essentially usurious and sumptuary. It is a struggle
between nobles to establish a hierarchy amongst themselves
from which their clan will benefit at a later date.
We propose to reserve the term potlatch for this kind of
institution that, with less risk and more accuracy, but also at greater
length, we might call: total services of an agonistic type.
Up to now we had scarcely found any examples of this
institution except among the tribes of the American Northwest,17
Melanesia, and Papua.18 Everywhere else, in Africa, Polynesia,
Malaysia, South America, and the rest of North America, the
basis of exchanges between clans and families appeared to us to
be the more elementary type of total services. However, more
detailed research has now uncovered a quite considerable
number of intermediate forms between those exchanges
comprising very acute rivalry and the destruction of wealth,
such as those of the American Northwest and Melanesia, and
others, where emulation is more moderate but where those
entering into contracts seek to outdo one another in their gifts.
In the same way we vie with one another in our presents of
thanks, banquets and weddings, and in simple invitations. We
still feel the need to revanchieren,19 as the Germans say. We have
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 29 ---
INTRODUCTION 9
discovered intermediate forms in the ancient Indo-European
world, and especially among the Thracians.20
Various themes—rules and ideas—are contained in this type
of law and economy. The most important feature among these
spiritual mechanisms is clearly one that obliges a person to
reciprocate the present that has been received. Now, the moral
and religious reason for this constraint is nowhere more apparent
than in Polynesia. Let us study it in greater detail, and we will
plainly see what force impels one to reciprocate the thing received,
and generally to enter into real contracts.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 30 ---
1
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS AND
THE OBLIGATION TO
RECIPROCATE (POLYNESIA)
I
‘TOTAL SERVICES’, ‘MATERNAL* GOODS’ AGAINST
‘MASCULINE GOODS’† (SAMOA)
During this research into the extension of contractual gifts,
it seemed for a long time as if potlatch proper did not exist
in Polynesia. Polynesian societies in which institutions were
most comparable did not appear to go beyond the system of
‘total services’, permanent contracts between clans pooling
their women, men, and children, and their rituals, etc. We
then studied in Samoa the remarkable custom of exchanging
emblazoned matting between chiefs on the occasion of a
marriage, which did not appear to us to go beyond this level.1
* The French utérin, strictly speaking, relates to children of the same mother, but not
necessarily of the same father. It is translated as ‘maternal’ and relates to the goods that are
passed on to such children, i.e. ‘maternal goods’.
† ‘Masculine goods’ [biens masculins] relates to goods passed on to children through the
father’s side.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 31 ---
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS 11
The elements of rivalry, destruction, and combat appeared to
be lacking, whereas this was not so in Melanesia. Finally, there
were too few facts available. Now we would be less critical about
the facts.
First, this system of contractual gifts in Samoa extends far
beyond marriage. Such gifts accompany the following events: the
birth of a child,2 circumcision,3 sickness,4 a daughter’s arrival at
puberty,5 funeral rites,6 trade.7
Next, two essential elements in potlatch proper can be
clearly distinguished here: the honour, prestige, and mana
conferred by wealth;8 and the absolute obligation to
reciprocate these gifts under pain of losing that mana, that
authority—the talisman and source of wealth that is authority
itself.9
On the one hand, as Turner tells us:
After the festivities at a birth, after having received and reciprocated
the oloa and the tonga—in other words, masculine and feminine goods—
husband and wife did not emerge any richer than before. But they
had the satisfaction of having witnessed what they considered to be a
great honour: the masses of property that had been assembled on
the occasion of the birth of their son.10
On the other hand, these gifts can be obligatory and
permanent, with no total counter-service in return except the
legal status that entails them. Thus the child whom the sister,
and consequently the brother-in-law, who is the maternal
uncle, receive from their brother and brother-in-law to bring
up, is himself termed a tonga, a possession on the mother’s
side.11 Now, he is:
the channel along which possessions that are internal in kind,12 the
tonga, continue to flow from the family of the child to that family.
Furthermore, the child is the means whereby his parents can obtain
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 32 ---
12 THE GIFT
possessions of a foreign kind (oloa) from the parents who have adopted
him, and this occurs throughout the child’s lifetime.
This sacrifice [of the natural bonds] facilitates an easy system of
exchange of property internal and external to the two kinship
sides.
In short, the child, belonging to the mother’s side, is the channel
through which the goods of the maternal kin are exchanged
against those of the paternal kin. It suffices to note that, living
with his maternal uncle, the child has plainly the right to live
there, and consequently possesses a general right over the latter’s
possessions. This system of ‘fosterage’ appears very close to that
of the generally acknowledged right of the maternal nephew in
Melanesian areas over the possessions of his uncle.13 Only the
theme of rivalry, combat, and destruction is lacking, for there to
be potlatch.
Let us, however, note these two terms, oloa, and tonga, and
let us consider particularly the tonga. This designates the
permanent paraphernalia, particularly the mats given at
marriage,14 inherited by the daughters of that marriage, and
the decorations and talismans that through the wife come into
the newly founded family, with an obligation to return them.15
In short, they are kinds of fixed property—immovable because
of their destination. The oloa16—designate objects, mainly tools,
that belong specifically to the husband. These are essentially
movable goods. Thus nowadays this term is applied to things
passed on by Whites.17 This is clearly a recent extension of the
meaning. We can leave on one side Turner’s translation:
oloa=foreign; tonga=native. It is incorrect and insufficient, but
not without interest, since it demonstrates that certain goods
that are termed tonga are more closely linked to the soil,18 the
clan, the family, and the person than certain others that are
termed oloa.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 33 ---
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS 13
Yet, if we extend the field of our observation, the notion of
tonga immediately takes on another dimension. In Maori, Tahitian,
Tongan, and Mangarevan (Gambier), it connotes everything that
may properly be termed possessions, everything that makes one
rich, powerful, and influential, and everything that can be
exchanged, and used as an object for compensating others.19
These are exclusively the precious articles, talismans, emblems,
mats, and sacred idols, sometimes even the traditions, cults,
and magic rituals. Here we link up with that notion of property-
as-talisman, which we are sure is general throughout the
Malaysian and Polynesian world, and even throughout the Pacific
as a whole.20
II
THE SPIRIT OF THE THING GIVEN (MAORI)
This observation leads us to a very important realization: the taonga
[sic] are strongly linked to the person, the clan, and the earth, at
least in the theory of Maori law and religion. They are the vehicle
for its mana, its magical, religious, and spiritual force. In a proverb
that happily has been recorded by Sir George Grey21 and
C.O.Davis22 the taonga are implored to destroy the individual who
has accepted them. Thus they contain within them that force, in
cases where the law, particularly the obligation to reciprocate,
may fail to be observed.
Our much regretted friend Hertz had perceived the
importance of these facts. With his touching disinterestedness
he had noted down ‘for Davy and Mauss’, on the card recording
the following fact. Colenso says:23 ‘They had a kind of exchange
system, or rather one of giving presents that must ultimately
either be reciprocated or given back.’ For example, dried fish is
exchanged for jellied birds or matting.24 All these are exchanged
between tribes or ‘friendly families without any kind of
stipulation’.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 34 ---
14 THE GIFT
But Hertz had also noted—and I have found it among his
records—a text whose importance had escaped the notice of both
of us, for I was equally aware of it.
Concerning the hau, the spirit of things, and especially that
of the forest and wild fowl it contains, Tamati Ranaipiri, one of
the best Maori informants of Elsdon Best, gives us, completely
by chance, and entirely without prejudice, the key to the
problem.25
I will speak to you about the hau…The hau is not the wind that
blows—not at all. Let us suppose that you possess a certain article
(taonga) and that you give me this article. You give it me without
setting a price on it.26 We strike no bargain about it. Now, I give this
article to a third person who, after a certain lapse of time, decides
to give me something as payment in return (utu).27 He makes a
present to me of something (taonga). Now, this taonga that he gives
me is the spirit (hau) of the taonga that I had received from you and
that I had given to him. The taonga that I received for these taonga
(which came from you) must be returned to you. It would not be
fair (tika) on my part to keep these taonga for myself, whether they
were desirable (rawe) or undesirable (kino). I must give them to you
because they are a hau28 of the taonga that you gave me. If I kept
this other taonga for myself, serious harm might befall me, even
death. This is the nature of the hau, the hau of personal property,
the hau of the taonga, the hau of the forest. Kati ena (But enough on
this subject).
This text, of capital importance, deserves a few comments. It
is purely Maori, permeated by that, as yet, vague theological
and juridical spirit of doctrines within the ‘house of secrets’,
but at times astonishingly clear, and presenting only one
obscure feature: the intervention of a third person. Yet, in
order to understand fully this Maori juridical expert, one
need only say:
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 35 ---
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS 15
The taonga and all goods termed strictly personal possess a hau, a
spiritual power. You give me one of them, and I pass it on to a third
party; he gives another to me in turn, because he is impelled to do so
by the hau my present possesses. I, for my part, am obliged to give
you that thing because I must return to you what is in reality the
effect of the hau of your taonga.
When interpreted in this way the idea not only becomes clear,
but emerges as one of the key ideas of Maori law. What imposes
obligation in the present received and exchanged, is the fact
that the thing received is not inactive. Even when it has been
abandoned by the giver, it still possesses something of him.
Through it the giver has a hold over the beneficiary just as,
being its owner, through it he has a hold over the thief.29 This is
because the taonga is animated by the hau of its forest, its native
heath and soil. It is truly ‘native’:30 the hau follows after anyone
possessing the thing.
It not only follows after the first recipient, and even, if the
occasion arises, a third person, but after any individual to whom
the taonga is merely passed on.31 In reality, it is the hau that wishes
to return to its birthplace, to the sanctuary of the forest and the
clan, and to the owner. The taonga or its hau—which itself moreover
possesses a kind of individuality32—is attached to this chain of
users until these give back from their own property, their taonga,
their goods, or from their labour or trading, by way of feasts,
festivals and presents, the equivalent or something of even greater
value. This in turn will give the donors authority and power over
the first donor, who has become the last recipient. This is the key
idea that in Samoa and New Zealand seems to dominate the
obligatory circulation of wealth, tribute, and gifts.
Such a fact throws light upon two important systems of
social phenomena in Polynesia and even outside that area. First,
we can grasp the nature of the legal tie that arises through the
passing on of a thing. We shall come back presently to this
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 36 ---
16 THE GIFT
point, when we show how these facts can contribute to a
general theory of obligation. For the time being, however, it
is clear that in Maori law, the legal tie, a tie occurring through
things, is one between souls, because the thing itself possesses
a soul, is of the soul. Hence it follows that to make a gift of
something to someone is to make a present of some part of
oneself. Next, in this way we can better account for the very
nature of exchange through gifts, of everything that we call
‘total services’, and among these, potlatch. In this system of
ideas one clearly and logically realizes that one must give back
to another person what is really part and parcel of his nature
and substance, because to accept something from somebody
is to accept some part of his spiritual essence, of his soul. To
retain that thing would be dangerous and mortal, not only
because it would be against law and morality, but also because
that thing coming from the person not only morally, but
physically and spiritually, that essence, that food,33 those goods,
whether movable or immovable, those women or those
descendants, those rituals or those acts of communion—all
exert a magical or religious hold over you. Finally, the thing
given is not inactive. Invested with life, often possessing
individuality, it seeks to return to what Hertz called its ‘place
of origin’ or to produce, on behalf of the clan and the native
soil from which it sprang, an equivalent to replace it.
III
OTHER THEMES: THE OBLIGATION TO GIVE,
THE OBLIGATION TO RECEIVE
To understand completely the institution of ‘total services’ and
of potlatch, one has still to discover the explanation of the two
other elements that are complementary to the former. The
institution of ‘total services’ does not merely carry with it the
obligation to reciprocate presents received. It also supposes two
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 37 ---
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS 17
other obligations just as important: the obligation, on the one
hand, to give presents, and on the other, to receive them. The
complete theory of these three obligations, of these three themes
relating to the same complex, would yield a satisfactory basic
explanation for this form of contract among Polynesian clans.
For the time being we can only sketch out how the subject might
be treated.
It is easy to find many facts concerning the obligation to
receive. For a clan, a household, a group of people, a guest,
have no option but to ask for hospitality,34 to receive presents,
to enter into trading,35 to contract alliances, through wives or
blood kinship. The Dayaks have even developed a whole system
of law and morality based upon the duty one has not to fail to
share in the meal at which one is present or that one has seen in
preparation.36
The obligation to give is no less important; a study of it might
enable us to understand how people have become exchangers of
goods and services. We can only point out a few facts. To refuse to
give,37 to fail to invite, just as to refuse to accept,38 is tantamount
to declaring war; it is to reject the bond of alliance and
commonality.39 Also, one gives because one is compelled to do
so, because the recipient possesses some kind of right of property
over anything that belongs to the donor.40 This ownership is
expressed and conceived of as a spiritual bond. Thus in Australia
the son-in-law who owes all the spoils of the hunt to his parents-
in-law may not eat anything in their presence for fear that their
mere breath will poison what he consumes.41 We have seen earlier
the rights of this kind that the taonga nephew on the female side
possesses in Samoa, which are exactly comparable to those of the
nephew on the female side (vasu) in Fiji.42
In all this there is a succession of rights and duties to consume
and reciprocate, corresponding to rights and duties to offer and
accept. Yet this intricate mingling of symmetrical and contrary
rights and duties ceases to appear contradictory if, above all, one
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 38 ---
18 THE GIFT
grasps that mixture of spiritual ties between things that to some
degree appertain to the soul, and individuals, and groups that to
some extent treat one another as things.
All these institutions express one fact alone, one social system,
one precise state of mind: everything—food, women, children,
property, talismans, land, labour services, priestly functions, and
ranks—is there for passing on, and for balancing accounts.
Everything passes to and fro as if there were a constant exchange
of a spiritual matter, including things and men, between clans
and individuals, distributed between social ranks, the sexes, and
the generations.
IV
NOTE: THE PRESENT MADE TO HUMANS, AND
THE PRESENT MADE TO THE GODS
A fourth theme plays a part in this system and moral code relating
to presents: it is that of the gift made to men in the sight of the
gods and nature. We have not undertaken the general study that
would be necessary to bring out its importance. Moreover, the
facts we have available do not all relate to those geographical
areas to which we have confined ourselves. Finally, the
mythological element that we scarcely yet understand is too strong
for us to leave it out of account. We shall therefore confine
ourselves to a few remarks.
In all societies in Northeast Siberia43 and among the Eskimos
of West Alaska,44 as with those on the Asian side of the Behring
Straits, potlatch45 produces an effect not only upon men, who
vie with one another in generosity, not only upon the things
they pass on to one another or consume at it, not only upon the
souls of the dead who are present and take part in it, and whose
names have been assumed by men, but even upon nature. The
exchange of presents between men, the ‘namesakes’—the
homonyms of the spirits, incite the spirits of the dead, the gods,
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 39 ---
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS 19
things, animals, and nature to be ‘generous towards them’.46
The explanation is given that the exchange of gifts produces an
abundance of riches. Nelson47 and Porter48 have provided us
with a good description of these festivals and of their effect on
the dead, on wild life, and on the whales and fish that are hunted
and caught by the Eskimos. In the kind of language employed
by the British trappers they have the expressive titles of ‘Asking
Festival’,49 or ‘Inviting-in Festival’. They normally extend beyond
the bounds of the winter villages. This effect upon nature is
clearly brought out in one of the recent studies of these
Eskimos.50
The Asian Eskimos have even invented a kind of contraption,
a wheel bedecked with all kinds of provisions borne on a sort
of festive mast, itself surmounted by a walrus head. This portion
of the mast projects out of the ceremonial tent whose support
it forms. Using another wheel, it is manipulated inside the tent
and turned in the direction of the sun’s movement. The
conjunction of all these themes could not be better
demonstrated.51
It is also evident among the Chukchee52 and the Koryaka of
the far northeast of Siberia. Both carry out the potlatch. But it is
the Chukchee of the coast, just like their neighbours, the Yuit,
the Asian Eskimos we have just mentioned, who most practise
these obligatory and voluntary exchanges of gifts and presents
during long drawn-out ‘Thanksgiving Ceremonies’,53
thanksgiving rites that occur frequently in winter and that follow
one after another in each of the houses. The remains of the
banqueting sacrifice are cast into the sea or scattered to the
winds; they return to their land of origin, taking with them the
wild animals killed during the year, who will return the next
year. Jochelson mentions festivals of the same kind among the
Koryak, but he has not been present at them, except for the
whale festival.54 Among the latter, the system of sacrifice seems
to be very well developed.55
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 40 ---
20 THE GIFT
Bogoras56 rightly compares these customs with those of the
Russian Koliada: children wearing masks go from house to house
demanding eggs and flour that one does not dare refuse to give
them. We know that this custom is a European one.57
The relationships that exist between these contracts and
exchanges among humans and those between men and the
gods throw light on a whole aspect of the theory of sacrifice.
First, they are perfectly understood, particularly in those
societies in which, although contractual and economic rituals
are practised between men, these men are the masked
incarnations, often Shaman priest-sorcerers, possessed by the
spirit whose name they bear. In reality, they merely act as
representatives of the spirits,58 because these exchanges and
contracts not only bear people and things along in their wake,
but also the sacred beings that, to a greater or lesser extent,
are associated with them.59 This is very clearly the case in the
Tlingit potlatch, in one of the two kinds of Haïda potlatch,
and in the Eskimo potlatch.
This evolution was a natural one. One of the first groups of
beings with which men had to enter into contract, and who, by
definition, were there to make a contract with them, were above
all the spirits of both the dead and of the gods. Indeed, it is they
who are the true owners of the things and possessions of this
world.60 With them it was most necessary to exchange, and
with them it was most dangerous not to exchange. Yet,
conversely, it was with them it was easiest and safest to exchange.
The purpose of destruction by sacrifice is precisely that it is an
act of giving that is necessarily reciprocated. All the forms of
potlatch in the American Northwest and in Northeast Asia know
this theme of destruction.61 It is not only in order to display
power, wealth, and lack of self-interest that slaves are put to
death, precious oils burnt, copper objects cast into the sea, and
even the houses of princes set on fire. It is also in order to
sacrifice to the spirits and the gods, indistinguishable from their
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 41 ---
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS 21
living embodiments, who bear their titles and are their initiates
and allies.
Yet already another theme appears that no longer needs this
human underpinning, one that may be as ancient as the potlatch
itself: it is believed that purchases must be made from the gods,
who can set the price of things. Perhaps nowhere is this idea
more characteristically expressed than among the Toradja of
Celebes Island. Kruyt62 tells us ‘that there the owner must
“purchase” from the spirits the right to carry out certain actions
on “his” property’, which is really theirs. Before cutting “his”
wood, before even tilling “his” soil or planting the upright post
of “his” house, the gods must be paid. Whereas the idea of
purchase even seems very little developed in the civil and
commercial usage of the Toradja,63 on the contrary this idea of
purchase from the spirits and the gods is utterly constant.
Malinowski, reporting on forms of exchange that we shall
describe shortly, points to acts of the same kind in the Trobriand
Islands. An evil spirit, a tauvau whose corpse has been found (that
of a snake or land crab) may be exorcised by presenting to it one
of the vaygu’a, a precious object that is both an ornament or talisman
and an object of wealth used in the exchanges of the kula. This gift
has an immediate effect upon the mind of this spirit.64 Moreover,
at the festival of the mila-mila,65 a potlatch to honour the dead, the
two kinds of vaygu’a, those of the kula and those that Malinowski
for the first time66 calls ‘permanent’ vaygu’a, are displayed and
offered to the spirits on a platform identical to that of the chief.
This makes their spirits benevolent. They carry off to the land of
the dead67 the shades of these precious objects, where they vie
with one another in their wealth just as living men do upon
returning from a solemn kula.68
Van Ossenbruggen, who is not only a theorist but also a
distinguished observer living on the spot, has noticed another
characteristic of these institutions.69 Gifts to humans and to the
gods also serve the purpose of buying peace between them both.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 42 ---
22 THE GIFT
In this way evil spirits and, more generally, bad influences, even
not personalized, are got rid of. A man’s curse allows jealous
spirits to enter into you and kill you, and evil influences to act.
Wrongs done to men make a guilty person weak when faced
with sinister spirits and things. Van Ossenbruggen particularly
interprets in this way the strewing of money along the path of
the wedding procession in China, and even the bride-price. This
is an interesting suggestion from which a whole series of facts
needs to be unravelled.70
It is evident that here a start can be made on formulating a
theory and history of contract sacrifice. Contract sacrifice supposes
institutions of the kind we have described and, conversely, contract
sacrifice realizes them to the full, because those gods who give
and return gifts are there to give a considerable thing in the place
of a small one.
It is perhaps not a result of pure chance that the two solemn
formulas of the contract—in Latin, do ut des, in Sanskrit, dada¯mi se,
dehi me71—also have been preserved in religious texts.
NOTE ON ALMS
Later, however, in the evolution of laws and religions, men appear
once more, having become again the representatives of the gods
and the dead, if they have ever ceased to be. For example, among
the Hausa in the Sudan, when the Guinea corn is ripe, fevers may
spread. The only way to avoid this fever is to make presents of
this grain to the poor.72 Also among the Hausa (but this time in
Tripoli), at the time of the Great Prayer (Baban Salla), the children
(these customs are Mediterranean and European) visit houses:
‘Should I enter?’ The reply is: ‘O long-eared hare, for a bone, one
gets services.’ (A poor person is happy to work for the rich.)
These gifts to children and the poor are pleasing to the dead.73
Among the Hausa these customs may be of Moslem origin,74
both Negro and European at the same time, and Berber also.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 43 ---
THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS 23
In any case here one can see how a theory of alms can develop.
Alms are the fruits of a moral notion of the gift and of fortune75
on the one hand, and of a notion of sacrifice, on the other.
Generosity is an obligation, because Nemesis avenges the poor
and the gods for the superabundance of happiness and wealth of
certain people who should rid themselves of it. This is the ancient
morality of the gift, which has become a principle of justice. The
gods and the spirits accept that the share of wealth and happiness
that has been offered to them and had been hitherto destroyed in
useless sacrifices should serve the poor and children.76 In
recounting this we are recounting the history of the moral ideas
of the Semites. The Arab sadaka originally meant exclusively justice,
as did the Hebrew zedaqa:77 it has come to mean alms. We can even
date from the Mischnaic era, from the victory of the ‘Poor’ in
Jerusalem, the time when the doctrine of charity and alms was
born, which, with Christianity and Islam, spread around the
world. It was at this time that the word zedaqa changed in meaning,
because in the Bible it did not mean alms.
However, let us return to our main subject: the gift, and the
obligation to reciprocate. These documents and comments have
not merely local ethnographic interest. A comparison can broaden
the scope of these facts, deepening their meaning.
The basic elements of the potlatch78 can therefore be found in
Polynesia, even if the institution in its entirety is not to be found
there.79 In any case ‘exchange-through-gift’ is the rule there. Yet,
it would be merely pure scholasticism to dwell on this theme of
the law if it were only Maori, or at the most, Polynesian. Let us
shift the emphasis of the subject. We can show, at least as regards
the obligation to reciprocate, that it has a completely different sphere
of application. We shall likewise point out the extension of other
obligations and prove that this interpretation is valid for several
other groups of societies.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 44 ---
2
THE EXTENSION OF
THIS SYSTEM
Liberality, honour, money
THE RULES OF GENEROSITY: THE
ANDAMAN ISLANDS*
First, these customs are also to be found among the Pygmies, who,
according to Fr Schmidt,1 are the most primitive of peoples. As
early as 1906 Brown observed facts of this kind among the Andaman
Islanders (North Island) and described them extremely well with
regard to hospitality between local groups and visitors to festivals
and fairs that serve as occasions for voluntary and obligatory
exchanges (a trade in ochre and sea products against the products
of the forest, etc.):
In spite of the considerable volume of these exchanges, since the
local group and the family, in other cases, know how to be self-sufficient
* See notes for Chapter 2, p. 97, introductory paragraph.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 45 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 25
in tools, etc.…these presents do not serve the same purpose as
commerce and exchange in more developed societies. The goal is
above all a moral one, the object being to foster friendly feelings
between the two persons in question, and if the exercise failed to do
so, everything had failed.2
Nobody is free to refuse the present that is offered. Everyone, men
and women, tries to…outdo one another in generosity. A kind of
rivalry existed to see who could give the greatest number of objects
of the greatest value.3
Presents put the seal upon marriage and form a link of kinship
between the two pairs of parents. They give the two ‘sides’ the
same nature, and this identical nature is made clearly manifest in
the prohibition that, from the first betrothal vows to the very
end of their days, places a taboo on the two groups of parents,
who from then onwards do not see each other or communicate
verbally, but continue constantly to exchange presents.4 In reality
this prohibition expresses both the close relations and the fear
that reign between this type of reciprocal creditors and debtors.
The proof that this is the underlying principle is shown by the
fact that the same taboo, indicative simultaneously both of
closeness and remoteness in relationships, is also established
between young people of both sexes who have undergone at the
same time the ceremonies of ‘eating turtle and eating pig’5 and
who are likewise bound for life to exchange presents. Facts of
this kind are also observed in Australia.6 Brown again reports on
the rituals of meeting after a long separation, the act of embrace,
the greeting made in tears, and shows how the exchange of
presents is their equivalent,7 and how feelings and persons are
mixed up together.8
In short, this represents an intermingling. Souls are mixed with
things; things with souls. Lives are mingled together, and this is
how, among persons and things so intermingled, each emerges
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 46 ---
26 THE GIFT
from their own sphere and mixes together. This is precisely what
contract and exchange are.
II
PRINCIPLES, REASONS, AND THE INTENSITY OF
EXCHANGE OF GIFTS (MELANESIA)
More so than the peoples of Polynesia, those of Melanesia have
preserved or developed the potlatch,9 although this is not a matter
that concerns us here. In any case, the Melanesians, better than
the Polynesians, have on the one hand preserved, and on the
other, developed the whole system of gifts and this form of
exchange. Since, moreover, with the former the notion of money10
emerges much more clearly than in Polynesia, the system becomes
in part complicated, but is also more clear-cut.
New Caledonia
Here we again find not only those ideas we seek to highlight,
but even their expression in the characteristic documents that
Leenhardt has collected about the New Caledonians. He began
by describing the pilou-pilou and the system of festivals, gifts and
services of all kinds11 that we should not hesitate to term
‘potlatch’. The legal terms used in the solemn speeches made
by the herald are entirely typical. Thus, at the ceremonial
presentation of festival yams,12 the herald says: ‘If there is some
ancient pilou before which we have not been, there, among the
Wi, etc.…, this yam hastens to it as once such a yam came from
them to us.’13 It is the thing itself that comes back. Later in the
same speech, it is the spirit of their ancestors who causes ‘to
descend… upon these portions of food the effects of their action
and strength.’ ‘The result of the action you have accomplished
appears today. Every generation has appeared in its mouth.’
Another way of representing the legal tie, one no less expressive,
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 47 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 27
is: ‘Our festivals are the movement of the hook that serves to
bind together the various sections of the straw roofing so as to
make one single roof, one single word.’14 It is the same things
that return, the same thread that passes through.15 Other authors
also point out these facts.16
Trobriand Islands
At the other end of the Melanesian world a very well-developed
system is equivalent to that of the New Caledonians. The
inhabitants of the Trobriand Islands are among the most civilized
of these races. Today they are wealthy pearl fishermen, and, before
the arrival of the Europeans, they were rich pottery
manufacturers and makers of shell money, stone axes, and
precious goods. They have always been good traders and bold
navigators. Malinowski gives them a name that fits them exactly
when he compares them to Jason’s fellow voyagers: ‘Argonauts
of the Western Pacific’. In one of the best volumes of descriptive
sociology, focusing, so to speak, on the subject that concerns
us, he has described the complete system of inter- and intratribal
trade that goes under the name of kula.17 We still await from
him the description of all the institutions that are governed by
the same principles of law and economics: marriage, the festival
of the dead, initiation, etc. Consequently, the description that
we shall give is still only provisional. But the facts are of capital
importance, and are plain.18
The kula is a sort of grand potlatch. The vehicle for busy
intertribal trade, it extends over the whole of the Trobriand Islands,
a part of the Entrecasteaux Islands, and the Amphlett Islands. In
all these territories it indirectly involves all the tribes and, directly,
a few of the large tribes—the Dobu in the Amphletts, the Kiriwina,
the Sinaketa, and Kitav in the Trobriands, and the Vakuta on
Woodlark Island. Malinowski gives no translation of kula, which
doubtless means ‘circle’. Indeed it is as if all these tribes, these
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 48 ---
28 THE GIFT
expeditions across the sea, these precious things and objects for
use, these types of food and festivals, these services rendered of
all kinds, ritual and sexual, these men and women,—were caught
up in a circle,19 following around this circle a regular movement
in time and space.
Kula trade is of a noble kind.20 It seems to be reserved for the
chiefs. The latter are at one and the same time the leaders of fleets
of ships and boats. They are the traders, and also the recipients of
gifts from their vassals, who are in fact also their children and
brothers-in-law, their subjects, and at the same time the chiefs of
various vassal villages. Trade is carried on in a noble fashion,
apparently in a disinterested and modest way.21 It is distinguished
carefully from the mere economic exchange of useful goods,
which is called gimwali.22 In fact, the latter is carried on, as well as
the kula, in the large primitive fairs that constitute the gatherings
of the intertribal kula, or in the small markets of the intratribal
kula. It is marked by very hard bargaining between the two parties,
a practice unworthy of the kula. Of an individual who does not
proceed in the kula with the necessary greatness of soul, it is said
that he is ‘conducting it like a gimwali.’ In appearance, at the very
least, the kula—as in the potlatch of the American Northwest—
consists in giving by some, and receiving by others.23 The
recipients of one day become the givers on the next. In the most
complete form, the most solemn, lofty, and competitive form of
the kula,24 that of the great sea expeditions, the Uvalaku, it is even
the rule to leave without having anything to exchange, without
even having anything to give, although it might be exchanged
for food, which one refuses even to ask for. One pretends only to
receive. It is when the visiting tribe plays host the following year
to the fleet of the tribe that has been visited that the presents will
be reciprocated with interest.
However, in kula not given on such a grand scale, advantage is
taken of the sea journey to exchange cargoes. The nobles
themselves carry on trade. About this there is much native theory.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 49 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 29
Numerous objects are solicited,25 asked for, and exchanged, and
every kind of relationship is established outside the kula, which,
however, always remains the purpose, and the decisive moment
in these relationships.
The act of giving itself assumes very solemn forms: the thing
received is disclaimed and mistrusted; it is only taken up for a
moment, after it has been cast at one’s feet. The giver affects an
exaggerated modesty:26 having solemnly brought on his present,
to the sound of a seashell, he excuses himself for giving only the
last of what remains to him, and throws down the object to be
given at the feet of his rival and partner.27 However, the seashell
and the herald proclaim to everybody the solemn nature of this
act of transfer. The aim of all this is to display generosity, freedom,
and autonomous action, as well as greatness.28 Yet, all in all, it is
mechanisms of obligation, and even of obligation through things,
that are called into play.
The essential objects in these exchange-gifts are the vaygu’a, a
kind of money.29 It is of two kinds: the mwali, which are beautiful
bracelets, carved, polished, and placed in a shell, and worn on
great occasions by their owners or relatives; and the soulava,
necklaces fashioned by the skilful craftsmen of Sinaketa in a
pretty mother-of-pearl made from red spondylus. They are
solemnly worn by the women,30 and, in cases of great anguish,
exceptionally by the men.31 Normally, however, both kinds are
hoarded and treasured. They are kept for the sheer pleasure of
possessing them. The making of the bracelets, fishing for and
making the necklaces into jewellery, the trade in these two objects
of exchange and prestige, together with other forms of trade
that are more profane and vulgar, constitute the source of the
Trobriand people’s fortune.
According to Malinowski, these vaygu’a follow a kind of circular
movement: the mwali, the bracelets, are passed on regularly from
west to east, whereas the soulava always travel from east to west.32
These two movements in opposite directions occur in all the
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 50 ---
30 THE GIFT
islands—Trobriand, Entrecasteaux, Amphlett, the remote islands—
Woodlark, Marshall Bennett, Tubetube—and finally the extreme
southeast coast of New Guinea, from which come the unworked
bracelets. There this trade meets the great expeditions of the same
kind that come from New Guinea (South Massim),33 which
Seligmann has described.
In principle the circulation of these signs of wealth is
continuous and unerring. They must not be kept too long a time,
nor must one be slow or difficult in passing them on.34 One
should not present them to anyone other than certain partners,
nor save in a certain direction—the ‘bracelet’ or the ‘necklace’
direction.35 One can and should keep them from one kula to the
next, and the whole community is proud of the vaygu’a that one
of its chiefs has obtained. There are even occasions, such as in the
preparation of funeral ceremonies, of great s’oi, when it is
permitted always to receive and to give nothing in return.36 Yet
this is in order to give back everything and to spend everything,
when the festival has begun. Thus it is indeed ownership that one
obtains with the gift that one receives. But it is ownership of a
certain kind. One could say that it partakes of all kinds of legal
principles that we, more modern, have carefully isolated from
one another. It is ownership and possession, a pledge and
something hired out, a thing sold and bought, and at the same
time deposited, mandated, and bequeathed in order to be passed
on to another. For it is only given you on condition that you
make use of it for another or pass it on to a third person, the
‘distant partner’, the murimuri.37 Such is the nature of this economic,
legal, and moral entity, which is truly typical, as Malinowski was
able to discover, find again, observe, and describe.
This institution has also its mythical, religious, and magical
aspect. The vaygu’a are not unimportant things, mere pieces of
money. Each one, at least the dearest and the most sought after—
and other objects enjoy the same prestige38—each one has its
name,39 a personality, a history, and even a tale attached to it. So
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 51 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 31
much is this so that certain individuals even take their own name
from them. It is not possible to say whether they are really the
object of a cult, for the Trobriand people are, after their fashion,
positivists. Yet one cannot fail to acknowledge the eminent and
sacred nature of the objects. To possess one is ‘exhilarating,
strengthening, and calming in itself.’40 Their owners fondle and
look at them for hours. Mere contact with them passes on their
virtues.41 Vaygu’a are placed on the forehead, on the chest of a
dying person, they are rubbed on his stomach, and dangled before
his nose. They are his supreme comfort.
Yet there is even more to it than this. The contract itself partakes
of this nature of the vaygu’a. Not only the bracelets and the
necklaces, but even all the goods, ornaments, and weapons,
everything that belongs to the partner, is so imbued with it, at
least emotionally if not in his inmost soul, that they participate
in the contract.42 A very beautiful phrase, ‘the enchantment of
the seashell’43 serves, after the possessions have been evoked, to
cast a spell over and move towards the ‘partner-candidate’ the
things that he must ask for and receive.44
[A state of excitement45 takes hold of my partner]46
A state of excitement takes hold of his dog,
A state of excitement takes hold of his belt…
And so on: ‘of his gwara [the taboo on coconuts and betel nuts];47
of his necklace bagido’u; of his necklace bagiriku; of his necklace
bagidudu,48 etc., etc.’
Another more mythical,49 even more curious phrase, but of a
more common type, expresses the same idea. The partner of the
kula has an animal to assist him, a crocodile that he calls upon
that has to bring him the necklaces [in Kitava, the mwali]:
The crocodile falls upon him, carries off your man, and shoves him
under the gebobo (the cargo hold on a boat).
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 52 ---
32 THE GIFT
Crocodile, bring me the necklace, bring me the bagido’u, the
bagiriku, etc.
A formula that comes earlier in the same ritual invokes a bird of
prey.50
The last formula of enchantment used by those associated
with or contracting in the ritual [at Dobu or at Kitava, by the
people of Kiriwina] contains a couplet51 of which two
interpretations are given. Moreover, the ritual is very long and
is repeated at length. Its purpose is to enumerate all that the
kula proscribes, all the things relating to hatred and war that
must be exorcised in order to be able to trade between friends.
Your fury, the dog turns up its nose at it;
Your war paint, the dog turns up its nose at it, etc.,
Other versions go as follows:52
Your fury, the dog is docile at, etc.
or:
Your fury takes off like the tide. The dog plays;
Your anger takes off like the tide. The dog plays; etc.
This must be understood as: ‘Your fury becomes like the dog who is
playing.’ The essential element is the metaphor of the dog that gets up
to lick the hand of its master. So the man, if not the woman of Dobu,
should also act. A second interpretation, sophisticated and not untinged
with scholasticism, so Malinowski declares, but clearly a very local
one, gives a different gloss that ties in better with what we know:
The dogs are playfully nuzzling one another. When you mention
this word ‘dog’, the precious things also come [to play], as has long
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 53 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 33
been ordained. We have given bracelets, necklaces will come. Both
will meet each other (like the dogs who come sniffing at one
another).
The expression, in the form of a parable, is a pretty one. The
entire set of collective sentiments is expressed at a stroke:
the potential hatred between associates, the isolation of the
vaygu’a, ceasing as if by magic; men and precious things
coming together like dogs that play and run up at the sound
of one’s voice.
Another symbolic expression is that of the marriage of the
mwali, the bracelets, the feminine symbols, with the soulava, the
necklaces, the masculine symbols, which stretch out towards each
another, as does male towards female.53
These various metaphors signify exactly the same thing as
is characterized in different terms by the mythical
jurisprudence of the Maori. Sociologically, it is once again the
mixture of things, values, contracts, and men that is so
expressed.54
Unfortunately, our knowledge of the legal rule that governs
these transactions is defective. It is either an unconscious rule,
imperfectly formulated by the Kiriwina people, Malinowski’s
informants; or, if it is clear for the Trobriand people, it should
be the subject of a fresh enquiry. We only possess details. The
first gift of a vaygu’a bears the name of vaga, ‘opening gift’.55 It is
the starting point, one that irrevocably commits the recipient
to make a reciprocating gift, the yotile,56 which Malinowski
felicitously translates as the ‘clinching gift’: the gift that seals
the transaction. Another name for this latter gift is kudu, the
tooth that bites, that really cuts, bites through, and liberates.57
It is obligatory; it is expected, and it must be equivalent to the
first gift. Occasionally it may be seized by force or by surprise.58
For a yotile that is an insufficient return gift, revenge may59 be
taken60 by magic, or at the very least by insult and a display of
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 54 ---
34 THE GIFT
resentment. If one is not able to reciprocate, at the very least
one may offer a basi, which merely ‘pierces’ the skin, does not
bite, and does not conclude the affair. It is a kind of advance
present, whose purpose is to delay. It appeases the former donor,
now the creditor; but does not free the debtor,61 the future donor.
These are all curious details, and everything about these
expressions is striking. Yet we do not know the sanction behind
it. Is it purely moral62 and magical? The individual who is
‘obdurate at the kula’, is he only scorned, and if needs be, cast
under a spell? Does the partner who does not keep faith lose
anything else: his noble rank, or at least his place among the
chiefs? This we still need to know.
Yet from another viewpoint the system is typical. Except for
ancient Germanic law that we shall be discussing later, in the
present state of our observations and historical, juridical, and
economic knowledge, it would be difficult to come across a
custom of gift-through-exchange more clear-cut, complete, and
consciously performed, and, moreover, better understood by the
observer recording it than the one Malinowski found among the
Trobriand people.63
The kula, its essential form, is itself only one element, the most
solemn one, in a vast system of services rendered and reciprocated,
which indeed seems to embrace the whole of Trobriand economic
and civil life. The kula seems to be merely the culminating point
of that life, particularly the kula between nations and tribes. It is
certainly one of the purposes of existence and for undertaking
long voyages. Yet in the end, only the chiefs, and even solely those
drawn from the coastal tribes—and then only a few—do in fact
take part in it. The kula merely gives concrete expression to many
other institutions, bringing them together.
First, the exchange of the vaygu’a themselves during the kula
forms the framework for a whole series of other exchanges,
extremely diverse in scope, ranging from bargaining to
remuneration, from solicitation to pure politeness, from out-
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 55 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 35
and-out hospitality to reticence and reserve. In the first place,
except for the uvalaku, large-scale solemn expeditions that are
purely ceremonial and competitive,64 all the kula provide the
occasion for gimwali, which are commonplace exchanges, not
necessarily occurring between partners.65 A free market exists
between individuals of allied tribes, side by side with closer
associations. In the second place, between partners in a kula
there pass, as if in a perpetual chain, additional gifts, presented
and reciprocated, as well as obligatory transactions. The kula
even takes these for granted. The association that is constituted,
and which is the principle of the kula,66 begins with a first
gift, the vaga, that is solicited with all one’s might by means of
‘inducements’. For this first gift the future partner, still a free
agent, can be wooed, and he is rewarded, so to speak, by a
preliminary series of gifts.67 Whilst one is certain that the
reciprocating vaygu’a, the yotile, the ‘clinching gift’, will be
returned, one is not sure that the vaga will be given, or even
that the ‘inducements’ will be accepted. This way of soliciting
and accepting a gift is the rule; each of the presents made in
this way bears a special name. They are placed on display before
being offered. In that case they are termed pari.68 Others bear
names that indicate the noble and magical nature of the object
that is offered.69 But if one accepts one of these presents it
shows that one is disposed to enter into the game, if not to
remain in it for long. Certain names given to these presents
express the legal situation that acceptance of them entails:70
this time the matter is regarded as settled. The present is
normally something fairly valuable: for example, a large,
polished stone axe, or a whalebone spoon. To accept it is to
bind oneself definitively to making a gift of the vaga, the first
present that is sought after. But one is still only half-committed
as a partner. Only the solemn observance of the tradition
commits one completely. The importance and nature of these
gifts springs from the extraordinary competition that occurs
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 56 ---
36 THE GIFT
between the potential partners in the expedition that arrives.
They seek out the best possible partner in the opposing tribe.
The affair is a serious matter, for the association one attempts
to create establishes a kind of clan link between the partners.71
Thus to choose, one must attract and dazzle the other person.72
Whilst rank is taken into account,73 one must attain one’s goal
before the others, or in a better way than they do, so bringing
about more plentiful exchanges of the most valuable things,
which are naturally the property of the richest people.
Competition, rivalry, ostentatiousness, the seeking after the
grandiose, and the stimulation of interest—these are the
various motives that underlie all these actions.74
These are the arrival gifts. Other gifts, equivalent in value to
them, are made in return. These are the departure gifts (called
talo’i at Sinaketa),75 made upon taking leave; they are always
superior to the arrival gifts. Already the cycle of total services and
total counter-services with interest is being completed side by
side with the kula.
There have naturally been—throughout the time these
transactions last—services of hospitality and food, and at Sinaketa,
relating to women.76 Finally, throughout this period, other
additional gifts, always reciprocated regularly, are offered. It would
even appear to us that the exchange of these korotumna represents
a primitive form of the kula—when it consisted also of exchanging
stone axes77 and the rounded tusks of the wild pig.78
Moreover, in our view the whole intertribal kula is merely the
extreme case, the most solemn and most dramatic one, of a more
general system. This takes the tribe itself, in its entirety, out of the
narrow sphere of its physical boundaries, and even of its interests
and rights. Yet within the tribe the clans and villages are normally
joined by links of the same kind. In that case it is only local and
domestic groups, together with their chiefs, who leave their
homes, pay visits, trade, and intermarry. This may no longer be
termed a kula. However, Malinowski, contrasting it with the ‘coastal
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 57 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 37
kula’, rightly talks of the ‘internal kula’ and of ‘kula communities’,
which provide the chief with the objects he will exchange.
However, it is not overstating it to speak in such cases of a potlatch
proper. For example, the visits of the Kiriwana people to Kitawa
for the s’oi,79 the funeral festivals, include many things other than
the exchange of the vaygu’a. One can see them as a kind of simulated
attack (youlawada),80 and a distribution of food, with a display of
pigs and yams.
Furthermore, the vaygu’a and all such objects are not always
acquired, made, and exchanged by the chiefs themselves.81 Indeed,
it may be said that they are neither made82 nor exchanged by the
chiefs for their own advantage. Most come to the chiefs in the
form of gifts from relatives of a lower rank, in particular from
brothers-in-law, who are at the same time vassals,83 or from sons
who hold land separately as vassals. In return, most of the vaygu’a,
upon the return of the expedition, are solemnly passed on to the
chiefs of the villages and clans, and even to the common people
of associated clans—in brief, to whoever has taken part, directly
or indirectly, and often very indirectly, in the expedition.84 In this
way the latter are compensated.
Finally, side by side with, or if one wishes, above, below, and
all around, and, in our opinion, at the bottom of this system of
internal kula, the system of gift-through-exchange permeates all
the economic, tribal, and moral life of the Trobriand people. It is
‘impregnated’ with it, as Malinowski very neatly expressed it. It
is a constant ‘give and take’.85 The process is marked by a
continuous flow in all directions of presents given, accepted, and
reciprocated, obligatorily and out of self-interest, by reason of
greatness and for services rendered, through challenges and
pledges. Here we cannot set out all the facts. Moreover, their
publication by Malinowski himself is not yet complete. First,
however, here are two main facts.
An entirely analogous relationship to that of the kula is that of
the wasi.86 It establishes regular acts of exchange, which are
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 58 ---
38 THE GIFT
obligatory between, on the one hand, agricultural tribes, and on
the other hand, coastal tribes. The agricultural partner comes to
lay his products in front of the house of his fisherman associate.
On another occasion, the latter, after a big fishing expedition,
will go to the agricultural village to repay these with interest
from the fruits of his catch.87 It is the same system of division of
labour as we have noted in New Zealand.
Another important kind of exchange takes on the form of
exhibitions.88 Such are the sagali, distributions of food89 on a
grand scale, that are made on several occasions: at harvest
time, at the building of the chiefs hut or new boats, or at
funeral festivals.90 These distributions are made to groups
that have performed some service for the chief or his clan:91
cultivation of the land, the transporting of the large tree
trunks from which boats or beams are carved, and for services
rendered at funerals by the members of the dead person’s
clan, etc. These distributions are absolutely equivalent to the
Tlingit potlatch. Even the themes of combat and rivalry
appear. In it, clans and phratries, and families allied to one
another, confront one another. Generally distributions seem
to be due to group action, in so far as the personality of the
chief does not make itself felt.
Yet in addition to these group rights and this collective
economy, already less resembling the kula, all individual
relationships of exchange seem to us to be of this type. Perhaps
only a few consist of mere barter. However, as barter is hardly
carried on except between relatives, allies, or partners in the kula
and the wasi, it does not seem that exchange is really free. Generally,
even what is received and has come into one’s possession in this
way—in whatever manner—is not kept for oneself, unless one
cannot do without it. Normally it is passed on to someone else,
to a brother-in-law, for example.92 It can happen that the identical
things one has acquired and then given away come back to one
in the course of the same day.
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 59 ---
THE EXTENSION OF THIS SYSTEM 39
All the rewards for ‘total services’ of any kind, things and
services, fall within this category. In random order, the following
are the most important.
The pokala93 and kaributu,94 ‘solicitory gifts’, which we have noted
in the kula, are species of a much larger category that corresponds
fairly closely to what we term ‘remuneration’. They are offered
to the gods and the spirits. Another generic name for the
‘remuneration’ is vakapula95 and mapula.96 They are marks of gratitude
and hospitable welcome and must be reciprocated. In this
connection, in our opinion Malinowski97 has made a very great
discovery that sheds light upon all the economic and juridical
relationships between the sexes within marriage: the services of
all kinds rendered to the wife by her husband are considered as a
remuneration-cum-gift for the service rendered by the wife when
she lends what the Koran still calls ‘the field’.
The somewhat childish legal language of the Trobriand Islanders
has given rise to a proliferation of distinctive names for all kinds
of total counter-services, according to the name of the service
that is being compensated,98 the thing given,99 the occasion,100
etc. Certain names take all these considerations into account; for
example, the gift made to a magic man, or for the acquisition of
a title, is called laga.101 One cannot credit the extent to which all
such vocabulary is complicated by a curious incapacity to divide
and define, and by the strange refinements that are given to names.
Other Melanesian societies
One need not multiply the comparisons with other areas of
Melanesia. However a few details gleaned here and there will
strengthen conviction and prove that the Trobriand people and
the New Caledonians have not developed in an abnormal way a
principle that might not be found among kindred peoples.
At the southern limit of Melanesia, in Fiji, where we have
identified the existence of potlatch, other remarkable institutions
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.

--- Page 60 ---
40 THE GIFT
thrive that belong to the gift system. There is a season, termed
kere-kere, during which nobody must be refused anything.102 Gifts
are exchanged between the two families on the occasion of a
marriage, etc.103 Moreover the money of Fiji, of sperm whale’s
teeth, is exactly of the same kind as that of the Trobriands. It bears
the name of tambua;104 it is decorated with stones (‘mothers of
the teeth’) and ornaments that are kinds of mascots, talismans,
and ‘good-luck’ objects of the tribe. The feelings cherished by
the Fijians for their tambua are exactly the same as those we have
just described: ‘they are treated like dolls. They are taken out of
the basket and admired, their beauty is spoken of; their “mother”
is oiled and polished.’105 To present them constitutes a request; to
accept them is to commit oneself.106
The Melanesians of New Guinea and certain Papuans influenced
by them call their money tau-tau.107 It is of the same kind and the
object of the same beliefs as that of the Trobriand Islanders.108
But this name must also be compared with that of tahu-’ahu,109
which means the ‘borrowing of pigs’ (Motu and Koita), and is a
name110 familiar to us. It is the very Polynesian term, the root of
the word taonga, which in Samoa and New Zealand means the
jewels and possessions incorporated into the family. The words
themselves are Polynesian, as are the things.111
It is known that the Melanesians and Papuans of New Guinea
practise the potlatch.112
The fine documents that Thurnwald has passed on to us
concerning the tribes of Buin113 and the Banaro114 have already
provided us with numerous points of comparison. The religious
nature of the things exchanged is apparent, particularly that of
money, in the way that it rewards songs, women, love, and services.
As in the Trobriand Islands, it is a kind of pledge. Finally, Thurnwald
has analysed in a sound case-study115 one of the facts that best
illustrates both what this system of reciprocal gifts consists of,
and what is incorrectly called marriage by purchase. In reality
this seems to include services to all involved, including the family-
EBSCOhost: eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) printed on 1/28/2026 3:42:11 AM UTC via THE UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG LIBRARIES. All use
subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use.