--- Page 1 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism: A Case Study of the Interaction between
Doctrine and Practice
Author(s): Richard Gombrich
Source: History of Religions, Nov., 1971, Vol. 11, No. 2 (Nov., 1971), pp. 203-219
Published by: The University of Chicago Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1061922
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to History of Religions
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 2 ---
Richard Gombrich "M E R I T
TRANSFERENCE" IN
SINHALESE
BUDDHISM: A CASE
STUDY OF THE
INTERACTION
BETWEEN
DOCTRINE AND
PRACTICE
In the history of religions, it is a commonplace that practices sur-
vive the advent of new ideologies and are then reinterpreted.
Ancient Roman authors were already aware that in their culture
new names had been given to old cults; and, in the seventeenth
century, it was the program of the Jesuits to give Christian mean-
ings to the religious practices of India and China. Because part of
the very raison d'etre of a ritual is its repetition, its "timeless-
ness," ritual systems seem endowed with a life of their own, a
capacity for survival independent of the meaning they are given.
Christmas trees and Easter eggs have survived the transition from
paganism to Christianity and, in many cases, from Christianity to
secularism. But, for the great oriental religions, comparatively few
such transitions have been documented, since their study lags far
behind that of Christianity.
The moral responsibility of the individual is a basic feature of
early Buddhist doctrine, the teaching of the Pali Canon (and other
203
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 3 ---
"Mlerit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
versions of the canon in as far as they are known to us). It is the
Buddha's solution to the problem of evil: one's suffering is due to
one's former sin, in this or a previous life, just as one's well-being
is due to one's former goodness. This is the Buddhist doctrine of
karma ("action"); the term denotes both the original moral act
and its power for subsequent reward or punishment. Moreover, the
morality of an action depends solely on the intention behind it:
intention (cetand) is karma.1 On the other hand, it is widely
known that Buddhists developed what seems prima facie to run
clean counter to the doctrine of karma, the idea and practice of
transferring merit (good karma), so that one's good actions build
up a kind of spiritual bank account from which one can make pay-
ments to others. (Incidentally, this is why the goodness of good
acts has been reified into "merit.") Thus, apparently, a sinner may
reap where another man has sown, and perhaps even obviate the
maturation of the seeds of evil he sowed himself. In the history of
Buddhism, this "transference of merit" is often associated with the
belief in bodhisattvas, who do good not only for their own spiritual
advance toward nirvana but also to alleviate the sufferings of
others. However in the Theravada Buddhism of Ceylon, with
which this article is primarily concerned, the "transference of
merit" is fully developed, but the bodhisattva is of only minor
importance.
My thesis is that the later, observable position logically can be,
and in fact is, so interpreted (rationalized) as to conform to the
former, canonical doctrine; and that this situation has evolved
through the reinterpretation of ritual, a reinterpretation which can
be traced through ancient texts and which is betrayed by shifts in
the meaning of certain religious technical terms.
Since an article has recently been devoted to precisely this sub-
ject matter,2 let me not attempt to do again what has already
been well done, but use Dr. Malalasekere's article as far as it can
take us and see where it leaves the problem. He thus describes the
doctrine of "transference of merit" in Ceylonese Buddhism. "The
doer of the good deed has merely to wish that the merit he had
thereby gained should accrue to someone in particular, if he so
wishes, or to 'all beings' " (p. 85). "The fact of 'transference' does
not in the slightest degree mean that the 'transferer' is deprived
of the merit he had originally acquired by his good deed. On the
1 Anguttara Nikdya III. 415.
2 G. P. Malalasekere, "'Transference of Merit' in Ceylonese Buddhism,"
Philosophy East and West 17, nos. 1-4 (January-October 1967): 85-90.
204
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 4 ---
History of Religions
contrary, the very act of 'transference' is a good deed in itself and,
therefore, enhances the merit already earned" (p. 86). One might
add that the classical simile for this act of transfer, patti in Pali,
is the lighting of one lamp from another.
A doctrinally associated way of earning merit is anumodand or
pattanumodand, "which means 'rejoicing in'; the 'joy of rapport'.
Here, the recipient of the transfer becomes a participant of the
original deed by associating himself with the deed done" (p. 86).
Malalasekere raises the question (p. 89) "whether this doctrine
... is a teaching of 'primitive' Buddhism," that is, whether it has
always been a part of Buddhist doctrine. His implied answer is in
the affirmative. Yet, to support this affirmation, he adduces only
two pieces of evidence: the Milindapanha, which as he says is
generally attributed to the first century A.D., and the higher
ordination ceremony (upasampadd), at which the ordinand says
that he offers his merit to his teacher and rejoices in his teacher's
merit. This statement by the ordinand comes twice in the lower
ordination ceremony (pabbajjd) which is reenacted before the
upasampadd proper begins, not in the upasampadd itself.3 The
rest of the text of these ceremonies is to be found in the first book
of the Mahcvagga, part of the canonical Vinaya Pitaka, but the
statements about transferring merit are not. Similar statements
are, in fact, appended to all Sinhalese Buddhist rituals. Without
denying the formula's "great antiquity" (p. 89), if the argument
below is accepted, we may reach the unsurprising conclusion that
the ordination ceremony contains at least one addition made
after the time (whenever that was) when the ceremony was first
standardized in roughly its present form. Thus, both Malalase-
kere's pieces of evidence are late, not "primitive."
Malalasekere not only reminds us that in Buddhism morality is a
function of ethical intention alone, but also shows (p. 86) that this
doctrine has been carried so far as to hold that rejoicing in the
good deed of another may be more meritorious than performing
the deed oneself. For example, a Sinhalese village monk who had
spent 5,000 rupees on a public religious ceremony to celebrate his
fiftieth birthday told me that a villager who felt sympathetic joy
in the merit he was earning might thereby earn more merit than he
did himself, without spending a cent. This seems to go further than
the New Testament story of the widow's mite. Even if, like Kant,
we accept an ethic of intention, the doctrine is not obvious;
3 J. F. Dickson, Ordination in Theravada Buddhism, ed. Piyadassi Thera,
Wheel Publication, no. 56 (Kandy, 1963), pp. 12, 14.
205
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 5 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
indeed, many moralists might find it startling. Moreover, I do not
think that it was part of the original Buddhist doctrine.
Malalasekere has cited (p. 86) as "the classic example of the
transference of merit" the ritual by which it is transferred to dead
relatives; and he further implies (top of p. 88) that this is where the
doctrine originated. I agree with his implication. Unfortunately,
in his presentation of the ritual and its aetiological myth, he has
conflated canonical and commentatorial texts, giving no referen-
ces, to build up a single synchronic picture. I submit that, if we
re-cover this ground with more discrimination, we shall see that
the doctrine of merit transference has a detectable history.
To understand that history we must keep in mind the distinc-
tion between what people say and believe (conscious lies apart),
which I call the cognitive level; how they act, which I call the
behavioral level; and what their actions suggest to an outside
observer that they believe, which I call the affective level. (Affec-
tive beliefs need not be consciously held or explicitly formulated.)
I hope to show that the doctrine lias developed through an inter-
action of these levels-behavior has affected doctrine and vice
versa-and that its present status illustrates the disparity between
cognitive and affective beliefs.
The Pali terms patti (proffering merit to others) and pattdnu-
modand (empathizing in another's merit) are not found in these
technical meanings in what we might call the oldest organized
stratum of the Pali Canon-the four Nikdyas and the Vinaya
Pitaka. The cognate verb anumodati is used in these early texts
with two closely related meanings: "to agree with," and "to re-
ceive with gratitude," that is, "to thank." In the first meaning,
Sariputta says of a doctrinal debate: na me koci bhikkhu anu-
modati: "no monk agrees with me."4 Parallel to the second mean-
ing is the noun anumodana,5 "gratitude" or "thanks." This word,
from the beginning, is mainly used as a technical term for the
thanks uttered by a monk on being given alms. This usage has
been preserved unchanged until today in the Sinhalese anumodan.
The passage in the Vinaya Pitaka6 in which the Buddha prescribes
the utterance of the anumodana and says that it should be said by
the eldest monk present does not specify the content of what is
said; although the Buddha doubtless composed his thanks
4 Anguttara Nikdya III. 194.
5 Rarer forms parallel to anumodana (neuter) are anumodana (feminine) and
anumodaniya (neuter).
6 Vinaya Pitaka (ed. Oldenberg) II. 212.
206
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 6 ---
History of Religions
variously to suit the occasion, one may assume the early use of
some benedictory formula to the effect "May your desires be ful-
filled," as is said today.
After any act of merit, typically a dane (feeding monks), the
doer of the merit transfers it to the gods, either by reciting the fol-
lowing Pali verse or by giving assent ("Sddhu sddhu") when it is
recited by a monk:
Akdsatthd ca bhummatthd devd ndgd mahiddhika
PuJiamn tarn anumoditvd ciram rakkhantu sdsanam.
May sky-dwelling and earth-dwelling gods, [and] ndgas (super-
natural serpents) of great power, having rejoiced at the merit,
long protect the Teaching.
The verse may be repeated with "me" substituted for "the
Teaching."
This transfer of merit to the gods is canonical. In the Mah&pari-
nibbdna Sutta, the Buddha receives a meal from two ministers.
"The Blessed One thanked (anumodi) them with these verses:
Wherever a wise man dwells he should feed the virtuous and re-
strained ascetics there, and dedicate the gift (dakkhinam adise) to
whatever deities are there; when worshipped they worship, when
honoured they honour him."7
The text does not use the term patti, although the meaning ex-
pressed is the same; patti, however, is the commentator's gloss:8
Tasam dakkhinarm ddise ti sanghassa dinne cattdro paccaye tdsam
gharadevatNnam apadiseyya pattim dadeyya. "'He should dedicate
the gift' means that when the Sangha have been given the four
requisites one should dedicate, give the merit to those house-
deities." And the commentator significantly continues: "'lWhen
worshipped they worship': they think, 'These people are not even
our relatives, and even so they give us merit.'"
The commentator is, of course, much later than the text, but I
think he is right about the implied origin of merit transference.
We come, here, to a complex of ideas centering on those funeral
feasts for dead relatives which are common to so many cultures.
Prima facie they are perhaps an unexpected phenomenon in a
religion which preaches constant rebirth, but Buddhism inherited
them from its Indian Hindu background at a time when the re-
birth doctrine was new. Professor von Fiirer-Haimendorf describes
how Chetris, a high Hindu caste in Nepal, can gain merit by having
7 Digha Nikaya II. 88 (sutta XVI. 1. 31).
8 Sumangala-vildsini II. 542.
207
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 7 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
brahmins recite sacred texts for a week (saptdha): "If performed as
a memorial rite the saptdha involves the gift of an entire set of
household goods to the senior brahmin priest, and it is popular
belief that as a result of this donation corresponding objects of
personal use will be available to the departed for his life in the
next world. The fact that such an idea is inconsistent with the
belief in the immediate reincarnation of every human being in a
shape conditioned by his earlier deeds does not seem to disturb the
Chetris, who like other Hindus see nothing incongruous in the
holding of apparently inconsistent views."9 Buddhists, preserving
a similar rite, are more concerned with doctrinal consistency.
One of the classes of living creatures (below gods, animals, and
men but above demons) in the Buddhist universe is the preta
(Pali, peta), a kind of hideous ghost usually suffering from hunger
and other discomforts. The word literally means "gone forth,"
that is, dead; but the choice of term has been determined by a
linguistic coincidence in Pali which links pretas with Sanskrit
pitaras-literally, "fathers"-the ancestors of the Hindu and the
recipient of his funerary libations. The Buddhist preta, then, al-
though in theory the reincarnation of anyone's relation, is in prac-
tice one's own dead relation, typically a dead parent.
The transfer of merit at the ddne for the dead (mataka ddne)
must now be recapitulated. Such danes are given at certain fixed
intervals of time after the death of a relative; their number and
size depend mainly on the wealth and social status of the family,
but the one after seven days is obligatory-it might be called the
mataka ddne par excellence. It is preceded by the recitation of
sacred texts, and at the end of their meal the monks are usually
given "requisites" (towels, pillowcases, etc.), analogously with
Chetri custom. Sometimes a little of the meal-for example, a
handful of rice-is thrown outside the house; this is variously said
to be for the pretas or for the crows. The crucial ritual takes place
after the monks have been given everything: the head of the
bereaved household slowly pours water into somne small vessel
until it overflows, while the monks intone in unison:
Yatha vdrivaha pfrd paripufrenti sdgaram
Evam eva ito dinnamn petdnam upakappati.l0
As the full water-bearing [rivers] fill the ocean, so indeed
does what is given here benefit the dead (preta).
Unname udakam vattam yathd ninnam pavattati
Evam eva ito dinnam petdnarm upakappati.10
9 C. von Fiirer-Haimendorf, MIorals and Merit (London, 1967), p. 168.
10 An alternative version has it as a wishl: upa-kappatu, "may it benefit."
208
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 8 ---
iistory of Religions
As water railled on a height reaches the low land, so indeed
does what is given here benefit the dead (preta).
The proceedings conclude with a short sermon on transience
(anityatd) to console the mourners. At the end, instead of the gener-
al formula transferring merit to the gods given above, the house-
holder (perhaps prompted by a monk) says:
Idam mell idtinanm hotu. Sukhitd hontu niitayo.
May this be for my relatives. May my relatives be happy.
While the pouring of water in Sinhalese ritual frequently
signalizes a solemn act (e.g., marriage), here it seems more relevant
to recall the libations poured to the Manes in other, older cultures.
Here it has been reinterpreted as the verses explain. The reinter-
pretation of this symbolic gesture is a minor example of the type of
reinterpretation which has operated on the ritual as a whole.
A Sinhalese village monk explained the proceedings to me thus.
The death is primarily an occasion for doing merit (pina) oneself;
secondarily, for offering it in case the dead man is expecting it. He
can however only rejoice and benefit from the merit if reborn as a
preta, because if he is higher than that he does not need the merit;
if he is lower, in hell (apdya), he cannot get it. [There is in fact a
further refinement: only the top class of preta, "those who live on
merit given by others" (paradattopajwvin) are able to sympathize
with the merit of others.12] But this does not mean, he said, that
the relatives giving the dane assume that the dead man is now a
preta, for if we pay a call we take the food along as a gift, but if the
person is out we eat it ourselves; similarly, the pinkama earns
merit for the living, whatever the fate of the dead. The origin of
the custom of offering it to the dead is this, he said. Once King
Bimbisara gave the Buddha a dane, and his ancestors, who were
pretas, came to see it. He offered them no pin; so they were sorely
disappointed. In the night there was a great noise round his
palace, so next morning he went to the Buddha and asked if this
boded ill for himself or his kingdom. The Buddha said not so, but
explained what had happened. So, to remedy his oversight,
Bimbisara gave him a ddne that day too and offered the pin to the
pretas.
The above statement contains small but telling points of
11 Thus a Sinhalese manual in my possession. The Pali Text Society edition of
the Petavatthu has vo "your" (plural) for me "my," but the general meaning is
unaffected since vo agrees with atnrnam.
12 Thus, e.g., Milindapanha, p. 294. The monk's explanation in the next four
lines also occurs on the same page.
209
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 9 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
doctrinal inconsistency: it is not clear why pretas who have already
come to the ddne (as in the story of Bimbisara) should be unable to
rejoice at the merit unless it is specifically offered; nor why gods,
who in other contexts are always offered merit, are in this context
said not to need it. However, the latter discrepancy can be removed
by saying that, while the gods are in no hurry for the merit, the
pretas need it urgently, because they are suffering in a state of
woe from which only pattdnumodand can relieve them, because
they have little or no opportunity for performing meritorious
actions independently. Remember, moreover, that length of life
is one of the things that decrease as one goes down the cosmic
scale; the Reverend Walpola Rahula has told me of a belief that
pretas live only seven days, which makes it essential to catch them
at that point before they sink further. He very plausibly connects
this with a belief found in other schools of Buddhism (Mahayana
and Sarvastivada) in an "in-between state" (antardbhava) lasting
seven days; during this period the person is suspended between
death and rebirth, and any improvement in karma will of course
make the next birth a better one. I must stress that this antara-
bhava is not a Theravada belief; it goes toward explaining the seven
days ddne on the historical, not on the doctrinal, level. From this
historical angle, it is also interesting to notice that in the Pali
words just quoted the donor transfers merit to all his relatives,
not just the recently dead man, thus reminding us that Hindu
offerings are to ancestors (pitaras).
The mataka ddne, although not described in every ritual detail,
is canonical in Theravada Buddhism. In one sutta,13 a brahmin
says to the Buddha that brahmins give funeral feasts (srdddhd;
Pali, saddhd), praying that the gifts [given to brahmins on their
behalf] may be enjoyed by their dead relatives, and he asks wheth-
er this really works. The Buddha at first replies that it does not
work if the relative is reborn in hell, as an animal, as a human, or
as a god, but works if he is reborn as a preta, in which case he lives
on what his friends and kinsmen supply. In reply to further ques-
tions, the Buddha says that if the particular relative the donor
had in mind is not a preta, other relatives who are pretas will en-
joy it, and it cannot happen that no relatives are reborn as pretas;
but anyway no donor is without reward (ddyako anipphalo). In
this text, no reference is made to the merit of the act; the gift is
said to benefit (upakappati) the relatives and they to enjoy (pari-
13 Anguttara Nikaya V. 269-73 (sutta CLXXVII).
210
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 10 ---
History of Religions
bhunjati) it, so presumably the object passes to them direct. That
all this is addressed to a brahmin points up the fact that the Bud-
dhists were consciously adapting Hindu custom.
There are many references to the custom in a canonical book,
the Petavatthu, which consists entirely of poems about pretas. The
three verses cited above come from a poem entitled the 2Sdti-
dhamma Sutta ("The sutta of behavior due to relatives"),14 which
also occurs under the title, taken from the first words, of Tirokudda
Sutta as the seventh item in the nine-item canonical chrestomathy,
the Khuddakapatha. Here is Bhikkhu Nanamoli's translation of the
whole poem.
1. Without the walls they stand and wait,
And at the junctions and road forks;
Returning to their erstwhile homes,
They wait beside the jambs of gates.
2. But when a rich feast is set out
With food and drink of every kind,
The fact that no man does recall
These creatures stems from their past acts.
3. So they who are compassionate
At heart do give for relatives
Such food and drink as may be pure
And good and fitting at these times:
4. 'Then let this be for relatives;
'May relatives have happiness.'
These ghosts of the departed kin
Foregathered and assembled there
5. Will eagerly their blessing give
For (plentiful) rich food and drink:
'So may our relatives live long,
'Owing to whom we have this gain;'
6. 'For honour to us has been donc,
'No giver ever lacked the fruit.'
Now there is never ploughing there,
Nor any cattle-herding found,
7. Nor merchandizing just the same,
Nor bartering for coin of gold:
The ghosts of the departed kin
Live there on giving given here;
8. As water showered on the hill
Flows down to reach the hollow vale,
So giving given here can serve
The ghosts of the departed kin.
14 Petavatthu I. 5.
211
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 11 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
9. As river-beds when full can bear
The water down to fill the sea,
So giving given here can serve
The ghosts of the departed kin.
10. 'He gave to me, he worked for me,
'He was my kin, friend, intimate.'
Give gifts, then, for departed ones,
Recalling what they used to do.
11. No weeping, nor yet sorrowing,
Nor any kind of mourning aids
Departed ones, whose kiin remain
(Unhelpful to them acting) thus.
12. But when this offering is given
Well placed in the Community
For them, then it can serve thetl long
In future and at once as well.
13. The True Idea for relatives lias thus )ben shown,
And how high honour to departed ones is done,
And how the bhikkhus can be given strength as well,
And how great merit can be stored away by you.15
The verses cited above were, in order, the ninth, eighth, and
first half of the fourth. As Stede has remarked,16 verses 11 and 12
(his 10 and 11) look like an addition. Moreover, until verse 12
there is no trace of Buddhism; dead relatives are to get food and
drink and benefit their donors in return. Not until the end is there
mention of the Sangha or of merit, and they are not well integra-
ted. In the context of the poem, the "this" which is given to the
relative in verse 4, line 1, is food and drink; only in the ritual as
now performed and explained is it merit or, rather, the chance to
rejoice at merit. It is this rather complicated explanation which
has circumvented a doctrinal incongruity which originally must
have been glaring. A vestige of the originally Hindu practice of
actually offering food has moreover been preserved in the optional
custom, noted above, of throwing a little food outside the house.
Those who say this is for the crows are rationalizing, although in
accordance with Buddhist ethics (kindness to animals); that it is
for the pretas must be the ancient explanation. Note that the
custom has persisted, with no logical congruity, throughout the
doctrinal discussions about to be presented; but, since their effect
has been to shift the emphasis of the ritual entirely away from the
food, it is not surprising that the handful of food for the pretas has
declined to a barely noticed, even an optional, detail.
15 Sanamoli, trans., Minor Readings and Illustrator (London, 1960), pp. 7-8.
16 Wilhelm Stede, Die Gespenstergeschichten des Petavatthu (Leipzig, 1914), p. 63.
212
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 12 ---
History of Religions
The story of the origin of the mataka ddne told me by the monk
is taken from the commentary on the Tirokudda Sutta, Buddha-
ghosa's Paramatthajotikd. In the commentary, the thing offered is
still explained as the food, etc., not the merit; but this is perhaps
not an important point, since the general interpretation is clearly
the modern one: the king gives a ddne to the Buddha and dedi-
cates it (uddisati) to the pretas. More important is the story of this
event given in the commentary to the Dhammapada.17 The Bud-
dha explained to Bimbisara that after he had given the first feast
the pretas had made a row because "when you gave the food they
did not get the merit" (ddne dinne pattim alabhamdnd). When
Bimbisara therefore fed the Buddha the next day, "he gave the
merit, saying 'Sir, may the divine food and drink from here accrue
to those pretas'" (Bhante, ito tesam petdnam dibbannapdnam
sampajjatu ti pattim addsi ). They get the food, then show them-
selves to the king naked. The king therefore gives robes (civardni)
the next day to the Buddha and his disciples, and the pretas
accordingly are clothed in heavenly garments. At this, they leave
the condition of preta (petattabhdva) and become gods (dibbatta-
bh&va). "The teacher, giving thanks, used the words of thanks,
'Outside the walls they stand,' etc." (Satthd anztmodanam kar-
onto: tirokuddesu titthantiti tirokudddnumodanam akCsi).
In this account, the spirits are getting not mere merit but more
tangible benefits-food and clothes. However, they get the food
and clothes as a result of getting merit-plainly an ambiguous
situation. The question whether the pretas could actually eat the
food was controversial in ancient times, even though that they could
do so is the natural interpretation of the sutta I have quoted. In
Nyanaponika's summary of the Kathdvatthu, a late canonical book
(probably third century B.C.), question 69 is, "Can alms which are
given here be enjoyed by beings elsewhere (e.g., by the ... Pe-
tas)?" And we are told that two sects think that they can, but that
Theravadins hold that "the mind of the Petas might be favourably
influenced, but the material food cannot be enjoyed by them."18
Although this seems to contradict the Theravadin commentaries
just quoted, which in their present form are many centuries
younger than the Kathdvatthz, it is very likely that the commen-
taries on this ancient custom are quoting an old story. But, what-
ever the date of the final victory of orthodoxy, it is clear that
17 Dhammapada Atthakathi I. 103-4.
18 Nyanaponika, Guide through the Abhidhamma-Pitaka, 2d ed. (Colombo,
1957), p. 71.
213
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 13 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
sensible Theravadin monks decided that food being visibly con-
sumed by a monk could not possibly be eaten by someone else,
so that, if people persisted in their habit of feeding dead relatives,
the custom required reinterpretation. What the relatives were
really getting was something else-merit.
Although we saw above that the offering of merit to the gods
occurs in the four Nikdyas, the doctrine of pattdnumodana, the
acquisition of merit by anyone through empathizing in another's
merit, does not. According to modern doctrine, such empathy can
take place whether one is "offered" the merit or not. But the
whole point of the story about Bimbisara's ancestors was that they
had to be offered the merit before they could get it, and the im-
plication of offering merit to the gods is that they, too, cannot get
it just by being present-which they are in any case (note that the
reference in the Mahdparinibbdna Sutta is specifically to the local
gods). Moreover, even now in all standardized situations a verse or
formula is recited offering the merit to specific benefactors. Why
should the Pali verse be recited at the dane offering the merit to
the gods? The doctrinal answer (given by the monk already
quoted) is that one is simply drawing their attention to the merit.
The same reason can be given for the less institutionalized practice
of carrying round among the laymen present an offering which one
is about to make to the Buddha or the Sangha: the laymen fold
their hands, touch or make to touch the offering with their finger-
tips, and then raise their hands to their foreheads in the gesture of
worship; the person who is physically making the offering is
drawing the attention of the others to his act of merit, and their
gestures symbolize their participation. In this case, the doctrinal
rationale fits. It does not, however, adequately explain what goes
on at the ritual for the dead.
The reinterpretation of the mataka ddne is the nub of this prob-
lem; it can be followed by tracing the evolution of the meaning
of anumodati from "thank" to "empathize," "rejoice in another's
merit." In the poem quoted above, the verb anumodati is used of
the pretas (poorly translated by Nanamoli as "their blessing
give"). Then, in the commentary, the Buddha, too, does an anu-
modana. Now observe what happens. The Buddhist givers of funer-
al feasts have been told by the monks that their relatives are not
getting the food but are getting something else-merit. The whole
point of the rite is to give your dead relative something, so the
donors are satisfied, provided they still have the feeling they are
giving. They give their merit away to the dead, like goods or cash,
214
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 14 ---
History of Religions
and the dead-presumably-say thank you (anumodanti). But no,
say the monks; the doctrine of karma will not allow this; you
cannot really give your merit away; you are just allowing the
dead to improve their minds by expressing sympathetic joy at
your good action in feeding us. So, although the text used in the
rite says that the pretas anumodanti, this does not mean that they
thank you for a gift, for nothing passes between you; they are just
rejoicing.
This is where the meaning of anumodati undergoes its crucial
change: as part of the doctrinal response to undoctrinal behavior.
Once anumodati comes to refer just to a pure mental state, to
empathy in doing good, it is of course open to anyone to do it at
any time, without having to wait for an offer, and this is the
modern position: the villagers could rejoice at the monk's fiftieth
birthday celebrations without specific invitation.
But since anumodati was originally used both of the monk who
gets the food and of the god or preta who gets the merit, the way is
now open to linguistic confusion. That is, indeed, what we find in
modern Sinhalese; for, while what the monk recites at a dSne is
still called the anumodana, according to modern doctrine it is
not he who anumodati, rejoices, but the gods,-the third parties.
We thus get the table (which I owe to a conversation with the Rev.
Rahula) (table 1). In the table, the three participants (or groups
TABLE 1
ACTIONS PERFORMED
TYPE OF
PART1CIPANTS Pali Sinhalese English GOOD DEED
Donor....... deti denava gives dana
Monk .......anumodapeti anumodan causes to cause desan&
karavanava to rejoice
Donor ....... anumodeti anum6dan causes to rejoice patti
karanava
Gods........ anumodanti anumodan rejoice pattanumodan&
venava
of participants) are on the left; in the center are the actions they
are performing in Pali, Sinhalese, and a literal English translation;
on the right is the type of good deed (according to the Pali list of
215
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 15 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
the Ten Good Deeds) which the action represents. The lines from
top to bottom are in chronological sequence.
The Pali alone suffices to show that something has been twisted
up here. In fact, the double causative form anumodapeti is not
in the dictionaries, and the plain causative anumodeti is cited
only once,19 in the quite different meaning "get the approval
of."
The popular understanding of what goes on is rather different.
It also corresponds to the historical view. The monk is understood
to be saying "thank you," as indeed he was by original doctrine.
The donor is then understood to be giving the gods his merit as a
quid pro quo, as if he were buying their protection for cash. How-
ever, doctrine has been so successful that what I have just called
"the popular understanding" is actually not explicit: when
questioned, people either confess ignorance or give the orthodox
explanation. The view of merit as spiritual cash is affective belief
only. But its antiquity is nevertheless demonstrable.
Before drawing our conclusions from this contrast between
cognitive and affective beliefs, it remains to document from Pali
texts the changes in the use of the terms patti and pattdnumodand
which culminated in the linguistic confusion just tabulated. The
transaction of exchanging merit for supernatural protection is
only possible after the complete separation of the merit earned by
a gift from the gift itself, a separation which we saw took place at
the mataka dane. In that context, the "transference of merit"
was made in the Kathdvatthu to conform to karma doctrine by
talking of the good intentions of all concerned. But this explana-
tion becomes more strained in our next example, in which the
merit of a gift is given retrospectively. In a Jdtaka20 story, the
bodhisattva, born as a brahmin merchant, has gained merit by
feeding a pratyekabuddha; he is shipwrecked, and while swimming
in the sea with an attendant is picked up by a deity whose duty it
is to protect virtuous men in misfortune; she did not notice the
attendant, so the "brahmin gave him the merit of his good deed,
and he received it gratefully" (brdhmano attand katakalydnato
tassa pattim addsi, so anumodi) and was picked up.21 Here we are
very close to the idea of a fund of merit, like a bank account, to
be drawn on at will. I stress that even this passage can be rational-
19 Paranattha-dlpani VI (Therzigtha Attfhak athd) 201, line 9. Even this is un-
certain, since there is a variant reading.
20 Jdtaka IV. 15-22.
21 Jataka IV. 21.
216
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 16 ---
History of Religions
ized by reference to the doctrine of intention; but the more
obvious interpretation of the passage would be to regard merit as a
kind of spiritual money. And a characteristic of money is that
when you have used it you no longer have it.
The equation of merit with money becomes virtually explicit in
a story from the commentary to the Dhammapada about two
brothers and some sugarcane. When the younger brother feeds a
pratyekabuddha sugarcane from his brother's field, he thinks, "If
my elder brother demands the price [of the cane] I shall give him
the price, if the merit I shall give the merit" (sace me jetthabh&tiko
mula.m dhardpessati miilam dassami sace pattim dhardpessati
pattim dassdmi).22 Of course, this again is not a doctrinal treatise;
but it is clear that the merit and the money are on an equal foot-
ing and that the giving of the merit will have nothing to do with
benevolence or purity of thoughts. Here the incongruity of the
transaction with doctrine may even be said to reach the cognitive
level, for which I know of no modern parallel.
Finally, let me quote from a late commentary a passage in
which both patti and anumodana occur. The words, though pur-
porting to describe Visakha and her friends after Visakha has
built a vihdra for the Sangha, could, translated into Sinhalese, be
an exact transcription of modern procedure. Visakha says to her
companions,23 "'The merit I have earned, rejoice at it, I give you
the gift of this merit.'24 With gladly trusting minds they all re-
joiced, 'Oh, it is good, oh, it is good.' One good lady who was there
concentrated especially on that gift of merit. Soon after she died
and was reborn in the Heaven of the Thirty Three" (Yam mayd
puiinam pasutam, tarn anumodatha, pattiddnam. vo dammi ti.
Aho sddhu aho sddhu ti pasannacittd sabbd pi anumodimsu.
Tattha aiiatard updsikd pi visesato tam pattiddnam manasa
akdsi ). This anumodana of hers she describes25 as a "pure rejoic-
ing" (suddh' anumodana) and hence truly meritorious. (This is in
the canonical text, not merely the commentary). Although in this
case the merit was offered, that "rejoicing" and not "thanking"
is the appropriate translation is clear both from this passage and
from the two previous passages cited.
We have here traced a correspondence between affective religion
and an early behavioral deviation, appearing in Buddhist stories
22 Dhammapada Atthakathi IV. 200.
23 Vimdnavatthu AtthakathS, p. 188.
24 The translation cannot convey the full ambiguity of pl)tti.
25 Vimninavatthu Atthakathdl, p. 189= Vimznavatthu 44. 9 (p. 40).
217
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 17 ---
"Merit Transference" in Sinhalese Buddhism
but never explicitly accepted by doctrine; doctrine has then
made a comeback and harmonized practice with canonical theory,
although not without becoming exceedingly tortuous (and philo-
logically barbarous). The stages through which behavior evolved
have been traced above: the behavior represented in passages
dealing with patti represent gradual deviation from doctrinal
orthodoxy, while the changed meanings of anumodana and its
verbs represent the rationalizations of doctrine to accommodate
the behavioral deviations. On the behavioral level, the passages
first quoted for patti represent someone's giving their merit to
another person and that person's saying thank you. Since the idea
that one can give away merit contradicts a fundamental doctrine,
this clear implication has to be explained away, which is done,
most ingeniously, by changing the meaning of niumodati. Al-
though I know of no passage which is quite explicit on the point,
the identity of the last passage quoted with modern practice
strongly suggests that the modern doctrine, too, liad been evolved
by the time it was written. For this, it is significant that the good
lady attributes her rebirth in heaven to the purity of her rejoicing
(anumodana). This comes not in the commentary but in a canonical
text, albeit a late one, the Vimdnavatthu. The entire evolution of
doctrine and behavior with which we are concerned therefore took
place, in all probability, within the ancient period, that is, the
period up to the final closure of the Pali Canon and the stabiliza-
tion of its exegesis; and what I have called the "modern" doc-
trine, although clearly different from the original doctrine, may
be as much as 2,000 years old.
Malalasekere concludes (p. 89) that "there cannot, strictly
speaking, be an arbitrary division of 'your' merit and 'mine.'"
This is his own philosophical interpretation rather than a repro-
duction of canonical doctrine. We have tried, rather, to show that
merit has always been thought of in personal terms, as belonging
to an agent, and indeed has finally been reified to a remarkable
extent, affectively becoming a transferable commodity.
The pure doctrine of karma has been preserved: man is entirely
and solely responsible for his own fate, creating his own future by
the moral quality of his intentions. But the very rigor of this
doctrine of total self-reliance has called into being an alternate,
parallel system, by which there are ways out. If doctrine cannot
get rid of these ways out, it has to ignore them or, better, to re-
interpret them. The transfer of merit to one's dead parents and
the expectation that one will, in turn, receive merit from one's
218
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Page 18 ---
History of Religions
children is an excellent example of this alternate system and of its
reinterpretation.
Finally, let me put it another way. The original doctrine of
karma solved the intellectual problem of evil, but the solution was
too perfect for emotional comfort, because it makes all suffering
one's own fault. The doctrines of patti and pattdnumodani in turn
solve, or at least alleviate, this emotional problem by mitigating
the rigor of the original doctrine and, in particular, by making it
possible to improve one's karma after death; at the same time,
they solve, by reinterpreting them, the intellectual problem of
justifying surviving rituals for the dead. Moreover, a sociologist
might add that, although the Buddhist doctrine of karma is
purely individualistic, merit transference can make merit appear
as the common property of a social group, so that patti is functional
for kinship solidarity. I consider its problem-solving function for
the individual to be more clearly demonstrable and more im-
portant. But, certainly, the present situation is overdetermined,
which accounts for its survival for over 2,000 years.
219
This content downloaded from
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)147.8.204.164 on Wed, 28 Jan 2026 03:38:11 UTC(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms