--- Page 1 ---
Journal of Economic Literature 2016, 54(2), 395–441
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/jel.54.2.395
The New Economics of Religion
†
Sriya Iyer*
The economics of religion is a relatively new field of research in economics. This
survey serves two purposes—it is backward-looking in that it traces the historical
and sociological origins of this field, and it is forward-looking in that it examines the
insights and research themes that are offered by economists to investigate religion
globally in the modern world. Several factors have influenced the economics of reli-
gion: (1) new developments in theoretical models including spatial models of religious
markets and evolutionary models of religious traits; (2) empirical work that addresses
innovatively econometric identification in examining causal influences on religious
behavior; (3) new research in the economic history of religion that considers religion
as an independent, rather than a dependent, variable; and (4) more studies of religion
outside the Western world. Based on these developments, this paper discusses four
themes— first, secularization, pluralism, regulation, and economic growth; second,
religious markets, club goods, differentiated products, and networks; third, identifi-
cation including secular competition and charitable giving; and fourth, conflict and
cooperation in developing societies. In reviewing this paradoxically ancient yet bur-
geoning field, this paper puts forward unanswered questions for scholars of the eco-
nomics of religion to reflect upon in years to come. (JEL D64, D72, L31, O43, Z12,
Z13)
1. Introduction very foundation of the American Economic
Association by Richard Ely and others asso-
Economics and religion are closer than ciated with the Social Gospel was very much
some might believe. In the nineteenth a religious movement” (Oslington 2003,
century in the United States, religion influ- p. xii). Ely’s vision in founding the American
enced key economic policy debates through Economic Association in 1885 was to bring
the economics profession because “the the ethics and ideals associated with the
Social Gospel movement into economics
* Faculty of Economics and St. Catharine’s College,
University of Cambridge. I thank the Editor Steven Froemel, Jane Fruehwirth, Julien Gagnon, Dan Hunger-
Durlauf for his kind encouragement to write this paper and man, Timur Kuran, Rohit Lamba, Michael McBride, Rob-
for his wide-ranging comments on it. I also thank seven bie Mochrie, Kaivan Munshi, David Newbery, Sheilagh
anonymous referees for their immensely helpful comments Ogilvie, Anja Prummer, Raghuram Rajan, Christopher
and suggestions for improvement. For helpful discussions Rauh, Bartosz Redlicki, Jared Rubin, and Chander Velu.
or valuable comments, I thank Jean-Paul Carvalho, Vasco † Go to http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/jel.54.2.395 to visit the
Carvalho, Partha Dasgupta, Daniel Friedman, Maren article page and view author disclosure statement.
395

--- Page 2 ---
396 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
in order to foster cooperation and greater inquiry (McCleary 2011b; Oslington 2014).
equality in society, but with a key role for Consequently, there is a need to illuminate
historical and statistical analysis. In so doing, the new directions in the territory in which
eventually this led to fundamental reforms the economics of religion finds itself today,
in US economic policy including unem- bringing up-to-date the many important
ployment insurance and child labor laws developments in research that have been
(Bateman and Kapstein 1999). made along the way. This paper attempts
And yet paradoxically, in a seminal article to do this and its ambition is both back-
published in 1998 in the Journal of Economic ward-looking as well as f orward-looking. It
Literature, Laurence Iannaccone introduced identifies some of the most important devel-
a new field of research to a wide audience opments in the economics of religion in
of economists and other social scientists— the last couple of decades, notably: (1) new
the economics of religion. In this paper he developments in theoretical models, includ-
argued, “If the study of religion does not yet ing spatial models of religious markets and
warrant a JEL classification number, let alone evolutionary models of religious preferences
the subfield status it enjoys within every and traits; (2) empirical work that innova-
other social science, it nevertheless qualifies tively addresses matters concerning econo-
as new territory within the expanding domain metric identification in examining causal
of economics” (Iannaccone 1998, p. 1465). influences on religious behavior; (3) new
How times have changed—apart from now research in the economic history of religion
having its own JEL classification number that considers religion as an independent,
(Z12), its own annual meetings, and a large rather than a dependent, variable; and (4)
body of international scholars invested and more studies of religion outside the Western
interested in this issue, the economics of reli- world. This paper also puts forward the still
gion has made important strides, with studies many unanswered questions in the econom-
that now encompass economic theory, public ics of religion that I hope scholars will reflect
economics, experimental economics, mac- upon in years to come. By highlighting how
roeconomics of growth, economic history, developments in economic theory, econo-
and economic development.1 As Chen and metric concerns with identification, and new
Hungerman (2014) rightly point out, there data both historical and contemporary, have
has been a six-fold increase in the number changed the way in which research in this
of economics papers alone published in this field is currently being conducted, this paper
area in the last decade. Although the field attempts in short to survey, to evaluate, and
is still nascent compared to other fields to make suggestions for the “new” economics
of economics research, this increase has of religion.
highlighted that the study of religion now Economic studies of religion contribute in
falls firmly within the purview of economic three ways: first, they show how economic
and statistical tools can be used to evalu-
ate the role of religion in society; second,
1 The economics of religion, although it now has its own
JEL code, still lacks its own journal. This reflects the fact they continue to cast light on the econom-
that research in the economics of religion intersects with ics of nonmarket behavior illustrating the
other fields in economics such as labor economics, pub-
role that norms, values, social capital, and
lic economics, and industrial organization, as well as fields
outside economics in sociology and political science. Since “spiritual capital” may play in influencing
authors can publish their work in a variety of venues, this human behaviors by affecting both beliefs
often makes it difficult for a researcher to comprehend
and actions; and third, they show how cul-
a complete grasp of the literature in the economics of
religion. ture more broadly, whether through religion

--- Page 3 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 397
or other kinds of cultural beliefs, affect eco- religious faith and this survey will not ven-
nomic systems. Many social scientists argue ture to comment on these topics. It is not
that when explaining countries’ economic that personal religious faith is unimportant;
growth, we should evaluate the role of cul- simply that as economists, it is difficult for us
ture more deeply (Landes 1998; Norris and to comment on it appropriately.
Inglehart 2004) and that as economists, Most theoretical research in the econom-
we ought to be vitally concerned about the ics of religion focuses on the demand side
moral consequences of economic growth in terms of the preferences of consumers
(Friedman 2005). Others have argued that of religion, or on the supply side in terms
the evolution of markets and the evolution of the structures of religious organizations.
of morals, culture, and institutions, includ- While early work in the economics of reli-
ing religion, need to be studied together gion explored the incentives that individ-
(Friedman 2008; Bowles 1998). On the one uals might have to hold religious beliefs
hand, religion and culture inform economic (Ekelund, Hébert, and Tollison 2002), more
behaviors and economic systems, markets, recent research is focused quite heavily on
and institutions. On the other hand, one’s the socioeconomic consequences of religion,
economic environment is also likely to influ- using economic theory and sophisticated sta-
ence one’s beliefs, morals, and religious tistical tools. As new data both historical and
choices. So the economic approach directly contemporary has become available, con-
links the study of markets with the study of cern with identification of religiosity effects
religion and culture.2 has become more pronounced.
In his 1998 review, Iannaccone made a This survey provides a selective, critical
very clear distinction between the econom- review of the literature and I focus mainly
ics of religion and other areas of academic on research conducted by economists in the
inquiry that is worth reiterating here. The economics of religion. A difficult issue here
economics of religion is research that uses is drawing a boundary between more general
the tools and methods of economics to study social science research on religion and the
religion as a dependent variable or to study work done by economists, because frequently
religion as an independent variable on other these boundaries intersect. Therefore I have
socioeconomic outcomes. In doing so, it also included the work of noneconomists,
draws upon ideas in public economics, labor notably sociologists and political scientists,
economics, industrial organization, devel- that use economists’ tools and methods or
opment economics, and international trade, that address the questions that economists
and uses tools developed in game theory and ask. As many ideas in the economics of reli-
econometrics. The economics of religion gion today owe their origins to other disci-
must be distinguished from what might be plines, it is important to give due precedence
called “religious economics,” which would to ideas that have come into economics from
be the use of religious ideas to provide these related social science domains.
social commentary on economic systems or In the first section, I discuss definitions of
behaviors. The economics of religion also religion, the historical and sociological roots
does not concern itself with the theological of the economics of religion that first raised
and institutional propagation of personal three hundred years ago many of the themes
we are still investigating today, and a snap-
shot of global religiosity. This sets the stage to
2 It is to be acknowledged that when discussing insti-
examine a number of themes that currently
tutions, economists do distinguish between religion and
culture. interest economists of religion including

--- Page 4 ---
398 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
secularization, pluralism, regulation, reli- their lives or supporting them either socially
gious competition, club goods models, char- or psychologically. Glock and Stark (1965)
itable giving, religious service provision, define it this way: “Religion, or what societ-
and other themes. I also discuss the evo- ies hold to be sacred, comprises an institu-
lution of ideas in broadly chronological tionalised system of symbols, beliefs, values,
order in which they have influenced the and practices focused on questions of ulti-
evolution of this field. Consequently, mate meaning” (p. 4). Of course, there are
this survey is divided into six sections— very famous textbook definitions including
(1) Historical Background and Global Durkheim’s definition of religion: “A reli-
Religiosity; (2) Secularization, Pluralism, gion is a unified system of beliefs and prac-
Regulation, and Economic Growth; tices relative to sacred things, that is to say,
(3) Religious Markets, Club Goods, things set apart and forbidden—beliefs and
Differentiated Products, and Networks; practices which unite into one single moral
(4) Identification, Secular Competition, community called a Church, all those who
and Charitable Giving; (5) Conflict and adhere to them” (Durkheim 1912).
Cooperation in Developing Societies; and Probing the economic concern with
(6) Unanswered Questions for Future religion is not restricted to scholars of the
Research in the Economics of Religion. twenty-first century. Adam Smith first made
reference to the church and competition
between religions in The Wealth of Nations
2. Historical Background
and in The Theory of Moral Sentiments.3
and Global Religiosity
Smith discusses three concepts that econ-
The economics of religion as a subfield is omists of religion still debate—the role of
relatively new, but the study of religion itself competition, religious institutions includ-
is ancient—many other disciplines, notably ing service provision, and religious plu-
philosophy, theology, history, anthropology, ralism (Anderson 1988).4 As Smith saw it,
and sociology have had much to say about competition was about an individual buyer
religion and religious beliefs. For econo- or seller raising or lowering their prices in
mists, definitions are central to the process response to conditions prevailing in the
of modeling. There are many different defi- market, largely independent of any notion
nitions of religion; some are substantive of market structure. 5 By the time Adam
and others are functional, so among schol-
ars there is no commonly accepted defini-
3 Alfred Marshall’s The Principles of Economics high-
tion of religion. Substantive definitions of lights the fundamental role of religion in molding both an
religion concern investigating religion as individual’s motivations and the course of world history
(see Marshall 1890, p. 1). Religion also features in Joseph
a philosophy or as a system of beliefs, and
Schumpeter’s History of Economic Analysis (1954).
using this to try to understand the world. For 4 But interpretations of how Adam Smith saw religion
example, in his 1928 book The Religion We are often varied among historians of economic thought: for
example, Emma Rothschild (1994), in her interpretation
Need, the distinguished Indian philosopher
of how Adam Smith viewed the invisible hand, also argues
Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan wrote that religion that Smith was critical of established religion in most of his
“is an expression of the spiritual experience work. She contends that “Smith’s comments on religion,
like Hume’s, are often ironical, and also highly conscious of
of a race, a record of its social evolution,
pious public opinion” (Rothschild 1994, p. 321).
an integral element of the society in which 5 As Anderson writes, “Smith viewed participation in
it is found” (Radhakrishnan 1928, p. 25). religion as a rational device by which individuals enhanced
the value of their human capital” (Anderson 1988, p. 1066).
Functional definitions focus on what reli-
They could then choose both their degree of belief and
gion does for people in terms of its role in their degree of participation in religion.

--- Page 5 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 399
Smith wrote about competition, it was a that a monopoly religious organization could
very familiar concept in the tradition of undermine a state.6 This has implications
economics writing at the time. His main for state repression of religion, the debates
contribution lies in using this concept to about international religious freedom, and
understand behavior and as a way of orga- the relation between the church and the
nizing society. Smith’s arguments are rele- state, a theme I return to in section 2.7
vant to understanding both contemporary Away from economics, in the nineteenth
religious violence and the balance between century, social scientists wrote much about
publicly and voluntarily provided services religion, including in related fields such as
by religious organizations, such as primary psychology, sociology, and anthropology.8
schooling and poor relief (Mochrie 2014). In the twentieth century, there was much
These themes recur in more contemporary less written about religion. Glock and Stark
studies, as discussed in section 5 below. quote Gordon W. Allport who wrote that the
Friedman (2011) argues that the evolution “subject of religion seems to have gone into
of economics as we know it today was influ- hiding” (Glock and Stark 1965, p. x). This
enced profoundly by changes in religious all changed with World War II, when much
beliefs in the times in which Adam Smith more began to be written about religion in
lived. As he contends, “Further, those other social sciences exploring themes such
at-the-outset influences of religious think- as religious commitment and the beginnings
ing not only fostered the subsequent spread of religious competition (Greeley 1962).
of Smithian thinking, especially in America, Sociologists were the first to study modern
but shaped the course of its reception. The religion and religious organizations using the
ultimate result was a variety of fundamental
resonances between economic thinking and
6 The view of religion supported by the state and get-
religious thinking that continue to influence ting benefits from a monopolistic state-supported structure
our public discussion of economic issues, of religion is also found in work of sociologists like Peter
Berger (1967).
and our public debate over economic pol-
7 A century later, although himself famous for speak-
icy, today” (Friedman 2011, p. 166). ing first of “the wall of separation between church and
Contemporary themes discussed in sec- state” Thomas Jefferson wrote about religion in a letter
from Monticello on September 1, 1820, thus: “It excites
tion 2 about the value of religious plural-
in him the gratifying reflection that his country has been
ism, the relationship between pluralism the first to prove to the world two truths, the most salutary
and religious participation, and the role to human society, that man can govern himself, and that
religious freedom is the most effectual anodyne against
of the church and the state, is exemplified
religious dissension: the maxim of civil government being
in the debate between Adam Smith and reversed in that of religion, where its true form is ‘divided
David Hume. Hume argued for the state we stand, united, we fall.’ ” This point of view of Jefferson
is very similar to the Adam Smith view of religious compe-
sponsorship of one unique religion and also
tition and freedom, but the importance of religious free-
highlighted rent seeking within religious dom extends also to the kind of religion that it espouses, for
organizations, and the relationship between example, religions themselves may be more tolerant and
moderate in societies that encourage religious competition.
religion and politics that led to civil disorder
8 For example, Sigmund Freud’s views on religion are
(Mochrie 2014). In contrast, Adam Smith contained in his book The Future of an Illusion (1927), in
argued that religious competition is ulti- which he thinks of religion as an irrational response to fam-
ily influences, especially the reassuring need for parental
mately good for the consumers of religion
protection, and the power of nature before which man is
and for the nature of the religious product aware of his own inconsequence and the inevitability of
itself because it reduces the capacity of reli- death. Freud goes so far as to argue that religion is linked
to the repression of an Oedipus complex by highlighting
gious organizations to extract rents, caused
instead the father’s role. Freud thus regarded religion as a
by poor governance. Smith was concerned sort of collective neurosis.

--- Page 6 ---
400 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
analogy of firm behavior, focusing on concepts for religion was viewed increasingly as very
such as competition (Stark and Bainbridge competitive.
1987), and this is first found in the work of One of the classic papers written on the
the sociologist Peter Berger (1963, 1967).9 economics of religion, Azzi and Ehrenberg
This initial notion was developed much fur- (1975), summarized the literature on what
ther in the seminal works of Roger Finke and the empirical correlates of religiosity had
Rodney Stark, who developed the thesis into discovered about the United States until
the “religious economies” argument (Finke then. Some of these trends are still visible,
and Stark 1992). Based on their analysis of although we now have data on a broad set
religious markets in the United States, Finke of countries. At the time, these trends were
and Stark are some of the early scholars who that women participated more in church-re-
made very important contributions in this lated activities than men;11 that church
area. Their focus was on questions such as attendance increases with age; that there are
the movement from sects to churches, the only weak relationships between income and
formation of cults as well as schisms, and church attendance, with it usually being pos-
renewal movements.10 The main themes in itive or backward bending, so that it is high-
this research are the idea of religious compe- est for those with middle incomes. Racial
tition, religious regulation, and new religious differences were also observed with A frican
movements. In the same tradition, Warner Americans attending church more than
(1993) articulated that a new paradigm had whites; and church attendance was found to
emerged for the sociological study of reli- be higher in rural than in urban areas (Azzi
gion in which he argued that in the United and Ehrenberg 1975, p. 32). Contemporary
States, organized religion flourished in an studies of the United States show the con-
open market. What motivated this para- tinued importance and practice of religion
digm was the empirical observation that in (Putnam and Campbell 2010).
the United States in the nineteenth century Contemporary research studies are aided
and the first half of the twentieth century, greatly by the availability of much better
“societal modernization went hand in hand data than we have ever had on religion pre-
with religious mobilization” (Warner 1993, viously (Finke 2013). In empirical work,
p. 1049). Religion in the United States was religion is conventionally measured either
thus distinct from religion in other parts of in terms of religious beliefs, such as prayer
the world, particularly the older paradigm and other indicators of “believing,” or alter-
of European secularization, and the market natively in terms of religious participation
and attendance such as church going, which
are indicators of “belonging.” These indica-
tors have been widened now to include data
9 The notion of competition here is an individual buyer on religious regulations and persecution,
or seller raising or lowering his or her prices in response to which incorporates international regulation
conditions prevailing in the market.
and violence indices, a research agenda that
10 Some definitions may be useful here: “churches” and
“sects” are both religious institutions, but the former depict
less tension with the wider world than the latter. As Stark
and Finke argue, “Tension consists of differences in norms 11 Although women participate more in church-related
and values and refers to the degree of distinctiveness, activities in the United States, in the Islamic world men
separation, and antagonism in the relationship between a participate much more in religion-related activities. In
religious group and the “outside” world. Put another way, some countries, women going to mosques is much more
the higher the tension between a religious group and its restricted, except in back rows, or upstairs. They are
surroundings the more costly it is to belong.” (emphasis in also not required to participate in Friday congregational
original, Stark and Finke 2002, p. 35). prayers.

--- Page 7 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 401
has flourished since 2000 (Grim and Finke in some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, it is
2006). These are used in many studies of not possible to be unaffiliated by law, and in
religion and the creation of these indices is others it is not possible in practice because
of fundamental importance to future work of social pressures. Equally, in countries that
on the economics of religion. are officially atheist, the number of unaffil-
Since the 1700s, scholars and writers from iated may be exaggerated because religious
Galileo and Voltaire to Mark Twain have people may falsify their religious preferences
forecast the extinction of religion in general to appear irreligious in public (Kuran 1995).
or some faiths in particular. Yet with all its For similar reasons, in places where the
consequences, positive and negative, religion devout dominate, the percentage of practic-
continues enduringly to persist. Moreover, ing or sincerely believing adherents may also
faiths once considered on their way to be inflated.
extinction have grown in numbers of adher- The geographic distribution of religious
ents and in global significance. The Global groups varies considerably (Pew Forum on
Religious Landscape Study showed that a Religion and Public Life 2012). Many are
large majority of the world’s population con- concentrated in the Asia-Pacific region,
tinues to be religious by various measures especially those who are Hindu, Buddhist,
(Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life folk or traditional religions, and other world
2012). This comprehensive demographic religions.12 Large numbers of the religiously
study of more than 230 countries and terri- unaffiliated live in China. The Asia-Pacific
tories estimated that more than 5.8 billion also hosts most of the world’s Muslims, who
adults and children are religiously affiliated also populate the Middle East, North Africa,
around the globe, representing 84 percent of and sub-Saharan Africa. The Christians are
the 2010 world population of 6.9 billion. The relatively equally distributed in Europe,
study analyzed 2,500 censuses, surveys, and Latin America, and sub-Saharan Africa.
population registers. As shown in figure 1, The Jews live mainly in North America and
the study showed that the world’s major Israel.13
religious groups in 2010 were Christians
(32 percent), Muslims (23 percent), Hindus
3. Secularization, Pluralism, Regulation,
(15 percent), Buddhists (7 percent), and
and Economic Growth
Jews (0.2 percent). As many as 16 percent
of respondents have no formal reported One set of ideas in the economics of reli-
religious affiliation (although they may have gion literature concerns the secularization
spiritual beliefs or beliefs in a higher power), hypothesis, which predicts how pervasive
which makes them the third largest group in
their sample. These findings are also consis-
12 The folk religions include African traditional reli-
tent with other scholarly work in the sociol- gions, Chinese folk religions, Native American religions,
ogy of religion that has documented the rise and Australian aboriginal religions. The other world reli-
gions include the Baha’i faith, Taoism, Jainism, Sikhism,
of the “nones” in the United States (see Hout
Shintoism, Tenrikyo, Wicca, and Zoroastrianism, which are
and Fischer 2002; Hout, Fischer, and Chaves not always included in country censuses.
2013). Hout, Fischer, and Chaves (2013) 13 The age distribution of the population also shows that
those religions concentrated in China or Western coun-
show that in 2012, 20 percent of Americans
tries have older populations. The median age for Muslims
reported no religious affiliation, a trend that and Hindus at twenty-three years and twenty-six years,
has increased since 1990 (Hout, Fischer, and respectively, is much lower than the median age for the
world’s population overall, which is twenty-eight years, or
Chaves 2013). The share of the unaffiliated
for Jews, which is thirty-six years (Pew Forum on Religion
group probably forms a lower bound because and Public Life 2012, p. 13).

--- Page 8 ---
402 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
Other
Folk
religions**
Jews 0.8%
religionists*
5.9%
0.2%
Buddhists
7.1%
Christians
31.5%
Hindus
15.0%
Unaffiliated
Muslims 16.3%
23.2%
Figure 1. Size of Major Religious Groups in 2010, Percentage of the Global Population
Notes: * Includes followers of African traditional religions, Chinese folk religions, Native American religions,
and Australian aboriginal religions.
** Includes Bahai’s, Jains, Sikhs, Shintoists, Taoists, followers of Tenrikyo, Wiccans, Zoroastrians, and many
other faiths. Percentage may not add to 100 due to rounding.
Source: Pew Research Center’s Forum on Religion and Public Life—Global Religious Landscape, December,
2012.
religion is as countries become richer. The between religion and growth the other way
main theme of this work is that economic round, examining the influence of religion
development by increasing education and on economic growth through cross-country
urbanization leads to decreased religiosity, studies.
and the role of organized religion is mini- Among other economists, Jacob Viner
mized with development.14 This is related to (1978) wrote about secularization.15 In his
debates about religious pluralism and partic- 1966 Jayne Lectures, Viner defined secu-
ipation, as well as state regulation of religion. larization as “a lessening of the influence
This section also evaluates the relationship on ethical and economic thought of eccle-
siastical authority and traditional church
creeds, and a shifting of weight from dogma
14 See Norris and Inglehart (2004) for carefully pre-
sented evidence using World Values Survey data to test the
secularization thesis. They conclude that “rich societies are
becoming more secular but the world as a whole is becom- 15 Viner’s unpublished work was edited posthumously
ing more religious” (emphasis in the original, Norris and by Jacques Melitz and Donald Winch and reproduced in
Inglehart 2004, p. 217). Oslington (2003).

--- Page 9 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 403
and r evelation and other-worldliness to to the supply of religious institutions such as
reason and sentiment and considerations churches, and these are also correlated with
of temporal welfare” (Viner as quoted in nonlinearities in population size and density
Oslington 2003, p. 159). The secularization (Olson 2011).
hypothesis was largely accepted by sociolo- A related question in these seculariza-
gists until the work of Iannacconne, Finke, tion debates is whether religious pluralism
and Stark, and others. Their work suggested per se decreases religious participation or
that rather than focusing only on the demand not (McBride 2008; Montgomery 2003;
side, which the secularization hypothesis Voas, Crockett, and Olson 2002). For many
epitomized, it is also crucial to examine the decades, sociologists argued that pluralism
supply side. It is to be acknowledged that reduces religious activity and is associated
many of the studies of secularization have with the secularization hypothesis. Finke and
been based primarily on US data. Stark (1988) argued the reverse—that plu-
The work by Barro and McCleary ralism increases church membership. Other
attempted to reinstate the secularization evidence from the United States also showed
hypothesis. Barro and McCleary (2003) that pluralism was associated with increased
find that economic development, mea- church attendance (Warner 1993). Pluralism
sured by increases in the standard of liv- is measured by the population percentage
ing, causes small declines both in religious that is affiliated with a particular religious
participation and beliefs. Yet, the effect is denomination. However, the evidence on
ambiguous, because although people in rich pluralism is limited by the statistical methods
countries might spend less time devoted to used to calculate its effects; for example one
religion than in poor countries, this is coun- study shows that correlations between mea-
terbalanced by greater money contribution sures of pluralism like a Herfindahl index
geared towards organized religion (Barro and religious participation are a function of
and McCleary 2005, p. 1348). The European the data and statistical methods used to cal-
experience, in terms of low religious partic- culate these measures (Voas, Crockett, and
ipation, is also explained by regulations that Olson 2002).
deter new religious entrants rather than McBride (2008) and Montgomery (2003)
explanations that rely on demand-side issues, use the literature from industrial organiza-
while the high levels of participation in the tion and product differentiation to exam-
United States are often attributed to more ine the relationship between pluralism and
competitive religious markets (Finke and participation. Using a Hotelling location
Stark 1992). model of product differentiation, McBride
The work on secularization was supported examines the equilibria of the model to
by other research on Europe that suggested show how pluralism and participation arise
that the decrease in religious attendance in out of religious demand and supply, illus-
Europe was not only due to fewer religious trating that correlations exist between plu-
“suppliers,” but that there was a genuine ralism and participation, which does not
fall in the demand for religion (Voas 2007). say anything about causality. He shows that
However, as Olson (2011) points out, distin- participation and pluralism are caused by
guishing the demand-side influences from unregulated entry into religious markets, the
the supply-side influences is difficult to do low costs of providing religious services, and
empirically, as they might be related to each religious preferences. His model demon-
other, mainly because religious participa- strates that population growth may increase
tion data that measures demand is related pluralism; that the relationship between

--- Page 10 ---
404 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
religious demand and population size mat- either when it is very secularized or when it
ters depending upon the level of the data is highly religious. Economic growth affects
used to i nvestigate this relationship; and that religious demand and hence participation,
religious regulations decrease pluralism but but also supply, as it can decrease the costs of
secular regulations may encourage religious service provision through advertising, better
participation. Montgomery (2003), while in monitoring of the faithful, and so forth, which
general being critical of models of this type, can increase rather than decrease pluralism.
puts forward a new measure of religious McBride highlights the role of religious mar-
competition that is a partial order on the set ket structure so that a monopoly denomina-
of religious markets so that, for instance, one tion may lower its strictness to become more
religious market A is considered to be more secularized. Moreover, restricting secular
competitive than the other B if the denom- substitutes will increase the demand for reli-
inations set in A includes the set of denom- gion, but the effect of prohibiting new entry
inations in B. Given this partial order of is more complicated. If it is combined with
competition measure, Montgomery’s model secular restrictions, then there could still be
shows that markets that are more compet- high religiosity. If secular substitutes are not
itive have higher religious participation, restricted, then the outcome will depend
although depicting this with US historical on how incumbent groups react. One of the
data demonstrates a negative relationship.16 interesting predictions of the model is that
He also shows that there is a relationship higher income inequality might cause more
between religious competition and the size strict religious groups. So, religious compe-
of the population, so that larger markets tition on the demand side and on the supply
are more competitive than smaller markets. side may lead to the increasing strength of
This is because larger markets can support a religion, even if secularization occurs, if the
larger range of religious options, and hence religious market is more open rather than
demonstrate greater participation. Also, if more regulated.
there are new denomination entrants into This has implications for whether regula-
the religious market, this may cause incum- tion of religious organizations is necessary.
bent denominations to increase their level of One theme in this largely empirical litera-
effort. On the empirical side, Hungerman ture is whether or not state religions and a
(2013) also suggests that predictions from monopolistic structure matters for the free-
some of the location models may not always dom of markets (Barro and McCleary 2003;
fit the data in all settings. Stark and Finke 2000; Barro and McCleary
Taking the secularization hypothesis 2005; North and Gwin 2004; Gruber 2005;
and religious competition further formally, Gruber and Hungerman 2008). One concern
McBride (2010) examines specifically why is whether deregulation or lack of regula-
“economic growth has not led to a decline tion of religious organizations is imperative
in religion despite past predictions that it (Hungerman 2011). Examining a large sam-
would” (p. 148). He shows that growth has ple of 188 independent countries of which
little effect on a market at the extremes, i.e., 40 percent had a state religion, Barro and
McCleary (2005) and McCleary and Barro
(2006) showed that if a country had a state
16 McBride’s (2008) analysis implies that Montgomery’s
approach may be looking at only one side of the market, religion, for given regulation, it provided
since by measuring competition by the observed diversity subsidies to organized religion, and that
of the market, this may ignore demand-side characteristics.
this affected economic growth. State reli-
This probably explains the finding that there is more com-
petition in larger markets. gions also reflect in higher adherence rates,

--- Page 11 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 405
a nonlinear effect with population, and per for secularization (Becker and Woessman
capita GDP has little effect. They also argue 2013; Cesur and Mocan 2014; Gulesci
that state religions are persistent for countries and Meyersson 2013; Hungerman 2014a).
in which there is no major regime change so Hence, the literature has examined the sec-
that if a state religion existed in 1900, it was ularization hypothesis empirically, as well as
much more likely to do so many decades later the relationship between religious pluralism,
in 1970 or 2000. McCleary and Barro (2006) religious participation, and the role of state
show that on the one hand, if state subsidies religions. There seems to be some evidence
to religion are provided, then this might for the secularization hypothesis, although
increase the demand for religion and reli- whether it is driven by demand-side or
gious participation; on the other hand, state supply-side changes in religious markets is
regulation decreases religious participation subject to debate.
because it affects the supply of religion. In Other econometric studies of religion
the context of state religions, a wide-ranging examine the relationship between religion
study by North and Gwin (2014) develops a and income the other way round, i.e., they
model of how a government may establish or cast light on whether religion has any effect
disestablish a state church, and then tests the at all on economic growth and performance
model on a panel dataset of western coun- across countries (Noland 2005). Barro and
tries over a sixty-five-year period. They con- McCleary (2003) examine the effects of reli-
firm that state religions mostly take hold in gious participation and beliefs on a country’s
countries with homogenous populations, a rate of economic growth. They conclude that
state religion reduces the overall religiosity believing matters more than belonging, so
of a population in religiously heterogeneous that for a given level of church attendance,
populations, and religious freedom increases increases in some religious beliefs—nota-
both attendance and pluralism. bly belief in heaven, hell, and an after-
Secularization research is also moving life—tends to increase economic growth.
into more micro-level empirical studies. For Economic growth is also affected negatively
example, Buser (2014) examines the effect by church attendance. They show this using
of income on religiosity in Ecuador. He uses instrumental variable analysis where the
an exogenous source of income variation—a instruments include the presence of a state
change in the eligibility criteria for a govern- religion, religious adherence, and an indica-
ment cash transfer program in Ecuador—in tor for religious pluralism. The underlying
order to estimate a causal effect of income model behind their work is that religious
on religiosity using a regression discontinu- beliefs affect individual traits that support
ity approach that deals with the identifica- economic progress. Their work is important
tion issues (discussed further in section 4, in the context of the secularization hypoth-
below). The Ecuadorian study demonstrates esis because they present the alternative
that households with higher incomes have “ religion-market” model, namely that greater
higher church attendance, and are also religious diversity promotes greater competi-
more likely to be members of Evangelical tion between religions, which leads to better
churches than the more widespread Catholic services provided, which leads to enhanced
churches in Ecuador. Moreover, while participation and beliefs, also influenced by
most of the debates about secularization the ability of the state to regulate religious
concern income, there are several papers organizations. The influence of the state can
that examine secularization and education, work in two ways—either by greater subsi-
rather than income, and which find evidence dies to religious organizations, the state can

--- Page 12 ---
406 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
increase adherents because better facilities separately from the effect of other fac-
are now better provided. Alternatively, if it tors, notably geography, other institutions,
is assumed that the state regulates religious and ethnic fractionalization, which are also
organizations by promoting monopoly such important growth determinants. Different
as, for example, with very established state results are obtained at the cross-country
religions, then this reduces their a bility versus intracountry levels. This is especially
to be as efficient in their operations, and true of religion, because diversity may lead
hence may lead to lower religious participa- to higher religiosity at the country level,
tion rates. So the effects of a state religion where individuals may move to join commu-
becomes an empirical question and in their nities of their same faith, but be detrimental
study, they do find evidence that govern- to religiosity within smaller areas, such as
ment regulation of religion decreases church the subcountry level where the diversity of
attendance; although state religion and state beliefs weakens the theological grip of any
regulation together show a very mildly posi- worldview and leads to lower religiosity, as
tive effect on attendance. some studies have shown. Perhaps echoing
In general, the cross-country the historical debates, the evidence foretells
regression-based studies are interesting, but that Adam Smith was probably correct about
not without their limitations. Some of them religion at the macro or national level, while
have statistical difficulties such as, for exam- David Hume assessed religion better at the
ple, those outlined by Voas, Crockett, and micro or community level.
Olson (2002). Durlauf et al. (2012) demon-
3.1 The Protestant Ethic, Human Capital,
strate the sensitivity of results to instrument
and Democracy
choices in such analyses. Durlauf et al. (2012)
show that when model-averaging methods The economics of religion today is influ-
are used, there is very little evidence that enced by Max Weber’s thesis, which discusses
religion-related variables do in fact predict the effect of the Protestant ethic on capital-
cross-country differences in income. Durlauf ism (Weber 1904). As Iannaccone reminds
et al. (2012) find that the work of Barro and us in his 1998 review, “Over the past cen-
McCleary (2003) demonstrating an effect tury, scholars have made many claims about
of religion on growth is statistically replica- the economic consequences of religion, but
ble, but not statistically robust. Arguing that none grander than those associated with Max
“God is not in the details,” they find no evi- Weber’s The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit
dence for the effect of religious beliefs on of Capitalism” (Iannaccone 1998, p. 1474).
growth once they control for model uncer- The central thesis of Weber’s writing is that
tainty, although they do find weak evidence there are certain theological aspects of the
for the effect of religious participation on Protestant doctrine such as “predestination,”
growth (Durlauf et al. 2012, p. 1060). “election,” “calling,” and success in business
Cross-country regressions have been the that were seen as contributing to salvation,
main staple of the macroeconomics of reli- generating a set of economic attitudes which
gion since the early days of research in the were the spirit of capitalism. The core of
economics of religion, and the collective set the Weber argument, which describes the
of results from such studies do need to be interplay between faith and human action, is
evaluated critically. Cross-country studies described by McCleary (2011a) thus: “God
typically use different econometric formula- demanded of each person a lifetime of works
tions. A problem is that it is often difficult that were ordered by morality. The believ-
to evaluate the effects of religion on growth er’s actions in the world originate in God’s

--- Page 13 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 407
grace; this faith in turn justifies itself by the discourse among economists at least, there
moral quality of the action. The quality of the has been a renewed interest in revisiting
action, Christian conduct, was defined by a the Weber hypothesis both theoretically
rational system of morality and became the and empirically (Cavalcanti, Parente, and
standard by which to measure the glory of Zhao 2007; Basten and Betz 2013). Part of
God. Thus, salvation by work (daily work, the reason this theory is interesting to econ-
not ascetic activities of monastic communi- omists is because, empirically, economic
ties) was organized and rationally justified in development in northern Europe could be
an impartial moral system that applied to the explained by developments that were asso-
activities of one’s daily life and logically led to ciated with Protestantism—e.g., the con-
the rational organization of labor” (McCleary cern with savings, entrepreneurial activity,
2011a, p. 4). Thus, Protestantism directly the frugality that Puritanism demanded,
contributed to the rise of modern capital- and the literacy needed to read the scrip-
ism by altering it in specific ways. In turn, as tures. Since spiritual grace from religion is
Landes (1998) and others have argued, the attained by demonstrating temporal success
causality could also have gone the other way in one’s calling through diligence, discipline,
so that secular ideas occasioned by capitalist self-denial, and thrift, the Protestant ethic
development may have led to less religious promoted a work ethic that increased sav-
attendance as, for example, in Northwest ings, capital accumulation, entrepreneurial
Europe. There are also other critiques of the activity, and investment. An important side
Weber thesis based on the view that the capi- effect is that it also encouraged human capi-
talist spirit predates the Reformation (Tawny tal formation and literacy, all of which might
1926; Gorski 2005). have contributed to economic growth in this
Sociologists have extensively evaluated period. Many empirical studies have sought
Weber’s thesis (see, for example, Lenski to establish if these economic relationships
1961). Among economists, many have been are found in historical or contemporary data,
interested in it. For example, Jacob Viner both from Europe and elsewhere.
(1978) discussed the Weber hypothesis in In macroeconomic work, Guiso, Sapienza,
one of five chapters on religion that were and Zingales (2003) revisit the Weber
edited and published posthumously. Viner hypothesis to examine the effect of religion
points out that Weber himself freely acknowl- on individuals’ economic attitudes, rather
edged that there were many predecessors to than looking at outcomes. Using World
his writings who remarked on a close his- Values Survey data between 1981 and 1997,
torical association between Protestantism they showed that religious beliefs were asso-
and capitalism. However, an important, and ciated with economic attitudes conducive to
often overlooked point in the discussions economic progress as measured by attitudes
of Weber—and it is a nuanced observation towards cooperation, government, women,
by Viner on Weber—is that while previous legal rules, thrift, and the market economy,
studies hinted at a “correlation,” to use the with different effects across religions, con-
language of modern economics, Weber may trolling for country fixed effects and individ-
have been the first to attribute “causality” to ual characteristics. They also used religious
the Protestant ethic. upbringing to identify the effect of religion
In Iannaccone’s 1998 review paper, he independently of individual characteristics,
pointed out that the most noteworthy aspect and by examining attitudes they are able
of the Protestant ethic thesis was the lack to identify the effect of religion on prefer-
of empirical support for it. In more recent ences. In examining attitudes, they found

--- Page 14 ---
408 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
that religious people were more trusting, every town to have a school, and these
trusted others and governments more, and authors look at the share of Protestants in a
believed more that markets are fair, com- county compared to Cath o lics and find that
pared to those who were less religious. They literacy in all-Protestant counties was 7–12
also found that religious people in this sam- percent higher than in all-Catholic counties.
ple were less sympathetic to women’s rights To identify causality in the face of the poten-
and more intolerant. They also found that tial endogeneity of Protestantism and liter-
trust was associated with participation while acy, they also use “distance to Wittenberg”
intolerance was associated with religious in Prussia (the place from which the
upbringing. Bénabou and Tirole (2006) dis- Reformation began) as their instrumental
cuss theoretically the links between having variable for Protestantism, on the basis that
more religious populations, high work effort, those further away were less likely to adopt
and its implications for low taxes and redis- Protestantism, to test for the effect on lit-
tribution. An effort to test the Weber work- eracy, which they find is very significant.
ethic hypothesis is Basten and Betz (2013), Consequently, this human-capital explana-
who investigate if Protestantism has effects tion may provide an alternative theory for
on the preferences for leisure, redistribution, Weber’s hypothesis. As shown in their work,
and state intervention in Switzerland. Using girls benefited especially from the Protestant
a fuzzy regression discontinuity design, they emphasis on education, reducing consider-
examine a historical experiment in which two ably the gender gap in education, and even-
parts of Switzerland in the sixteenth cen- tually fertility as well (Becker, Cinnirella, and
tury adopted different religions, Reformed Woessmann 2010).
Protestantism and Roman Catholicism. Relatedly, Jared Rubin (2014) explores
Subsequently using data from 1980 onwards, econometrically whether the initial spread
they find that in those municipalities that of the Protestant Reformation was associ-
were completely Reformed Protestant, ated with the spread of the printing press
support for leisure and redistribution was because it allowed the ideas engendered by
greater, and support for intervention lower, the Reformation to spread to a much wider
than in Roman Catholic municipalities. audience. Examining city-level data on con-
A renewed interest in revisiting the version to Protestantism and other factors
Weber hypothesis using historical data within the Holy Roman Empire, he shows
has also prompted alternative explana- that cities with a printing press by 1500 were
tions for economic growth. An import- 29 percent more likely to be Protestant by
ant side-effect of Protestantism is that it 1600 (Rubin 2014).17 In keeping with studies
encouraged human-capital formation and that use distance indicators as instrumental
literacy. Becker and Woessmann (2009) variables to deal with potential endogene-
propose that rather than a work-ethic argu- ity, Rubin instruments for printing presses
ment, the human-capital explanation is a with the “distance from Mainz,” which
more plausible reason for Weber’s theory. was the birthplace of printing in 1450. His
They argue that Protestants in late-nine- results are robust even when using a mea-
teenth-century Prussia had higher human sure of the intensity of printing, as measured
capital, which increased their productiv- by the number of books written in German
ity and hence economic growth for coun-
tries dominated by them. Martin Luther’s
17 The Holy Roman Empire comprises modern
Reformation had unintended consequences
Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, Netherlands, Austria,
with respect to education, as he encouraged France, Poland, and the Czech Republic (Rubin 2014).

--- Page 15 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 409
between 1450 and 1600 and printed in a democracy, such as the literacy necessary
city, rather than only by the existence of a to read the scriptures. More interestingly,
printing press. Again he finds that cities with he finds that the historical prevalence of
greater intensity of printing were more likely Protestant missionaries predicts democracy,
to adopt Protestantism. So there seems to be although Catholic missionaries do not do so.
some evidence that a more human- capital- He also argues that this is because missionary
based explanation of Weber’s theory has organizations in the nineteenth century in the
some empirical support in the literature. United States were larger in terms of their
The role of Protestantism is also relevant size and access to financial resources than
in the context of research on missionary most labor unions, NGOs, and banks, with
activity (Woodberry 2011; 2012). This work the exception of some very large commercial
locates the study of Protestantism in the con- banks (Woodberry 2012, p. 247). Especially
text of the broader role of institutions that outside Europe, religion influenced both
affect macroeconomic growth (Acemoglu, whether countries went in for printing and
Johnson, and Robinson 2001). In a masterly whether printing led to the development
paper, Robert Woodberry (2012) relates mis- of mass literacy through the publication of
sionary activity to the formation of democratic newspapers.18 In cross-national statistical
institutions. He argues that “conversionary analysis, he shows that the existence of these
Protestants” influenced the development of missions affected printing, education, devel-
democracy around the world because they opment, rule of law, corruption, and espe-
espoused particular things that spurred cially democracy. In summary, the literature
democracy, including liberty, education, has some support for the Weber hypothesis,
printing, newspapers, voluntary organiza- but also for other explanations including
tions, and reforms associated with colonial- human-capital-based theories, which may be
ism, creating preconditions for the success linked to the formation of democratic insti-
of democratic institutions. Religious, moral, tutions around the world.
and cultural factors shape moral behavior—
as he writes, “Many of the major histori-
4. Religious Markets, Club Goods,
cal and statistical arguments about the rise
Differentiated Products, and Networks
and spread of democracy collapse when we
account for religious factors in a historically While some studies in the economics of
sensitive way” (Woodberry 2012, p. 244). religion consider the role of religion on mac-
Based on a sample of 142 countries, he roeconomic growth, others focus on devel-
shows that Protestant missions explain about oping insights from microeconomics. As
half the variation in democracy in Africa, Iannaccone pointed out in his 1998 review,
Asia, Latin America, and Oceania, and that while the Azzi–Ehrenberg model was the
their inclusion in standard growth regres- first formal model of religious participation,
sions makes variables that are popularly used
in these regressions insignificant. He argues
that there are omitted variables that might 18 Woodberry writes of India: “For example, within
drive the relationship between Protestantism 32 years of importing a press to India in 1800, three British
missionaries printed more than 212,000 copies of books in
and the factors that are ascribed to helping
40 languages and, along with other missionaries, created
democracy. Encouraging people to read the the fonts and paper that dominated South Asian printing
Bible in their own language and allowing for much of the nineteenth century” (Woodberry 2012,
p. 250). He also points out that this spurred the Hindus
the religious laity to be more involved with
and Muslims to respond, often with religious books that
religion encouraged factors that prompted arose in competition.

--- Page 16 ---
410 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
and the basis of almost all subsequent eco- 1998; Montgomery 1996; Stark, Iannaccone,
nomic models in this area, the models that and Finke 1996; Stark and Finke 2000;
came later highlighted a host of other pay- Berman 2000). In this approach, individuals
offs to religion incorporating the collective are rational consumers of religion who decide
dimensions of identity, social support, and whether or not to believe, or in which reli-
mutual aid (Iannaccone 1998, pp. 1480–81). gion to believe, based on a cost–benefit anal-
The microeconomic approach has brought ysis and relative to their initial endowments.
many key insights to the study of religion. In this view, people adopt religion because it
First, it has highlighted the value of thinking is optimal for them to do so and their beliefs
about religion in terms of club goods models, and activities may change over time. In a sim-
religious markets, and differentiated prod- ilar way, the supply of religion is explained by
ucts in such markets. Second, it has high- churches behaving similarly to clubs or firms
lighted a role for spatial competition models in a competitive market, and especially pro-
from industrial organization, and for reli- viding services to attract potential custom-
gious networks. Third, new research in this ers. One methodological concern for these
area is testing economic theories of religion economic rational choice theories of religion
in laboratory and field experiments. and religious competition is the nature of the
In thinking about religion as an industry or objective function and the possibility of mul-
beliefs as a product, it is clear that religion usu- tiple equilibria: As Hungerman writes, econ-
ally has entry costs, and that it competes with omists need to decide, “what a congregation’s
other religions (Jelen 2002). As with other objective function is. Do congregations max-
products, we can learn about the characteris- imize members, donations, or some ethereal
tics of religious goods and how different they concept of ‘religiosity?’ ”(Hungerman 2011,
are from each other and other products that p. 259; see also Eswaran 2011; Montgomery
compete with them. The literature has been 2003).
concerned with evaluating secular substi- The first formal model of consumer choice
tutes to religion and philanthropy by religious in religious markets was that developed by
organizations. Economics has also been use- Azzi and Ehrenberg (1975). The paper exam-
ful for thinking about the evolution of con- ined household time allocation and church
gregations and denominations, theoretically attendance by developing a multiperiod util-
and empirically in different institutional con- ity-maximizing model of household behavior
texts. Economists and other social scientists including the household’s life-cycle religious
have been proactive in exploring the rational participation profile. It argued that the rela-
choice approach to understanding religion, tive differences in wages between men and
but also to understanding how religious com- women, and consequently their different
petition matters (Becker and Murphy 2000; opportunity costs of time, could explain their
Montgomery 2003; Putnam and Campbell differential involvement in religious activi-
2010; Iannaccone and Berman 2008; Bisin ties. The argument here was that as wages
and Verdier 2000; Prummer and Siedlarek increased, less time would be devoted to
2014). This view also examines “spiri- religious participation. They also extended
tual capital”— or religious capital—which the model in several ways and tested their
embodies the norms and networks organized theory on church membership and church
on the basis of religion. The rational choice attendance data from the United States.
approach to the study of religion is found in One of the key assumptions of the model is
the work of many economists and sociologists that there are benefits in the afterlife to reli-
(Azzi and Ehrenberg 1975; Iannaccone 1992, gious participation—unlike other forms of

--- Page 17 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 411
participation in nonmarket activities, which the economics of religion sometimes fail to
have implications for the allocation of time resonate with non-Western religions, pre-
during the individual’s lifetime. They identi- cisely because of their neglect of social pres-
fied three motives for church attendance—a sures. In contrast, the club goods models of
“salvation motive” (expected afterlife con- religion do allow for social pressures within
sumption), a “consumption motive” (satis- clubs, and it is these models that I discuss
faction with current church attendance) and next.
a “social-pressure motive” (where church
4.1 Club Goods Models
attendance directly increases the chance
of success in business). Most subsequent One of the most influential papers in the
research in the economics of religion that economics of religion is the 1992 paper pub-
used the Azzi–Ehrenberg framework has lished in the Journal of Political Economy by
focused on the salvation motive and the con- Lawrence Iannaccone. The paper initiated
sumption motive; fewer studies have focused the literature on the club models of religion,
on the social-pressure motive. They also used which think of religion as a club good that has
the model to explain some of the sociological positive returns to “participatory crowding,”
findings on religious attendance mentioned showing that this can lead to free-rider prob-
previously; for example, if market consump- lems that are mitigated by costs that increase
tion alternatives are limited in rural areas, participation of the devout while at the same
the social value of religious activities may be time screening out those whose participa-
higher there, leading to higher participation. tion is likely to be low.19 Iannaccone pres-
If discrimination in the job market reduced ents an economic analysis of religious groups
the market consumption alternatives of that explains why religious group members’
nonwhites, then this could be a factor that utility can increase when unusual religious
drives greater religious participation among practices and “seemingly inefficient prohibi-
nonwhites. Research by Iannaccone also tions” exist. He argues that efficient religions
shows that religious activities increase later with rational members may adopt practices
in life, and why as wages increase, religious such as stigma, sacrifice, and other unusual
participation is reflected more in contribu- behaviors. If some religions prohibit alterna-
tions than in religious attendance per se. tive activities that compete away members’
One critique of the Azzi–Ehrenberg resources, then these prohibitions in effect
framework is that the notion of “freedom of screen the more committed members from
religion” is largely, though not exclusively of the less committed ones. They also induce
course, a Western phenomenon. In India, substitution towards religious activities
the Middle East, Tibet, or Indonesia, one because they make participation in alterna-
is born into a religion and “choice” in this tive activities more costly. The unproduc-
instance typically means giving up one’s right tive costs of behavioral requirements can be
to live within the community of one’s birth. thought of as a tax on alternative, more sec-
Practically speaking then, people do not have ular activities. His analysis also makes a use-
a choice of religion. This implies that many ful distinction between churches and sects,
people may practice a religion that they do
not approve of, or which even harms their
interests. Kuran (1995) discusses this at 19 A “club” is a “voluntary group deriving mutual bene-
length in the context of Islam, Catholicism, fits from sharing one or more of the following: production
costs, the members’ characteristics, or a good character-
and Judaism. For this reason, the Azzi–
ised by excludable benefits” (Sandler and Tschirhart as
Ehrenberg framework and other models in quoted in McBride 2007, p. 396).

--- Page 18 ---
412 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
where groups that have norms that are very effects on their labor market outcomes. The
deviant from the existing culture are termed core of Berman’s argument is that contrary
sects while groups that are more consistent to the predictions of price theory, partici-
with prevailing cultures are termed churches. pating more in prescriptive religion-related
While this distinction has been usefully activity is highly time-intensive and so should
applied to Christian religions, I would con- not be observed when there is an increase
tend that this distinction is also equally valid in real wages. But across the world, the
for non-Christian and non-Western religions growth of the most time-intensive radical
as well. Also, sectarian groups attract those religious movements, whether ultraorthodox
with less “secular” opportunities and again, Judaism or radical Islam and Hinduism, are
this is true of non-Christian religions as well. occurring precisely as real wages are increas-
This work by Iannaccone spawned a dis- ing. Berman skillfully resolves this paradox:
tinct line of research within the econom- using club model explanations, he argues
ics of religion, which is the so-called “club that mutual insurance networks are formed
models” of religion. These models have con- by actions that are religiously motivated.
tributed vitally to our understanding of how Prohibitions imposed by religions can then
sects develop.20 These models are based on be understood in the context of these models
the idea that producing and consuming reli- because they can be seen as an extreme tax
gion has all the features of a collective good on other secular activities outside the reli-
and that like other collective goods, there gious club. This increases religious activity
is potential for free riding, lack of commit- among members. Thus, even if real wages
ment, and participation. Hence, in keeping are rising, greater strictness of religious
with the broad Iannaccone framework, these observance counteracts this effectively. He
models look at stigmas and sacrifice as ways also makes the very interesting point that one
of screening members, and predict that can also observe “efficient intolerance” if, for
more sectarian communities have tighter example, there is more secular antagonism
networks and higher aid from members than towards an extreme religious sect, and this
less sectarian religious groups (Iannaccone also discourages the members of this club
1992; Berman 2000; Chen 2010). More from engaging in other secular activities.
recent research that conducts an experi- Using the example of yeshiva attendance in
mental test of the club model using a sacri- Israel, he argues that subsidies have caused
fice mechanism within a public goods game, labor supply to fall, because it causes greater
and allowing groups to form endogenously, sacrifices. This might also explain high fer-
shows that groups that have preferences for tility rates among these populations. This is
higher sacrifice screen out free-riders and because when viewed as a tax, religious pro-
increase their contributions to the public hibitions lower increases in wages, but do
good (Aimone et al. 2013). not alter the value of women’s time, which
A seminal paper in this area is Eli perhaps explains the higher fertility of these
Berman’s study of ultraorthodox Jews in ultrareligious communities.
Israel (Berman 2000), in which he examined Other studies of club-goods models of reli-
how subsidies to students in Jewish religious gion include Chen (2010) which is based on a
schools increased participation and had survey of 8,140 households from 1997–1999
in Indonesia. He examines how the Asian
financial crisis affected religious participa-
20 One paper which examines how a specific denomina-
tion in Indonesia, showing that those who
tion fits the club model is McBride (2007) who examines
how the Mormon Church fits the club goods model. were most affected by the crisis were more

--- Page 19 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 413
likely to increase their religious p articipation Berman by arguing that religious ideology
as measured through the study of the Koran including rituals and increasing h omogeneity
and Islamic school attendance; in this way, has a key role to play in the sustenance of
religious organizations were providing the commune—notably, by increasing
ex post social insurance for people who were equality, commitment, loyalty, and the ben-
the subject of negative income and consump- efits of commune membership, when for
tion shocks. Economic distress in particular example the returns to skills outside the
stimulates religious intensity and this is pro- commune increase with economic develop-
viding something that other forms of insur- ment. Overall, the club goods models have
ance are not providing. Chen also shows that been very useful in providing an overarching
increased religious intensity is not simply a framework within which to view the activi-
consequence of having more leisure time ties of religious organizations, and to explain
for religious activities or a decrease in the religion-related phenomena.
opportunity cost of time; rather, in response
4.2 Strictness and Networks
to economic distress, people increased labor
and religious intensity. The stigma-screening theory developed
The evolution of research on club mod- in the work of Iannaccone, Berman, and
els has also been developed by Abramitzky others is a cornerstone of the economics of
(2008 and 2009). Sociologists have discussed religion.21 Their argument is that stigmatiz-
communes (Bader, Mencken, and Parker ing behaviors in religion screen out potential
2006; Sosis and Bressler 2003). Abramitzky free-riders, so according to this theory, strict
argues that agricultural communes that churches in general ought to have fewer
share a common set of values, using the free-riders, higher contributions, and better
example of the Israeli kibbutzim, persist and religious goods. While much of the research
can collapse, and that studying the condi- on the economic theory of religion examines
tions under which this happens is interest- groups in a static context, some research
ing. He highlights theoretical concerns such examines religious groups in a dynamic
as communes trying to maximize equality setting. Counter to this established theory
subject to participation constraints, such as and showing that even strict churches have
a brain drain caused by more productive free-riders and target efforts towards them,
members leaving, free riding causing moral McBride (2015) argues that religious groups
hazard, and shirking, which is an incentive need free-riders to potentially increase
compatibility constraint, and constraints future memberships. This argument is very
caused by adverse selection. Greater equal- compelling because it suggests that if expo-
ity makes all of these constraints severe and sure to a religious good increases religious
therefore communes such as the Hutterrites capital22 and subsequent commitment, then
and the Israeli kibbutzim evolved norms in the church needs to view free-riders as an
response to these issues, notably, factors like investment, and that consequently strict
isolating themselves, group ownership of churches might permit some free riding to
property, investments in education within
the commune, high fertility, and a greater
21 It should be noted that Iannaccone’s work on the
emphasis on ideology and commitment to a
strictness thesis built on the work of Dean Kelley and his
religious commune, which have all contrib- book on Why Conservative Churches are Growing (1972).
uted to the evolution of communes as we 22 Religious capital is defined as “a type of human and
social capital that increases an individual’s productivity and
know them today. Abramitzky takes forward
consumption value of religious goods” (McBride 2015,
the club goods models of Iannaccone and p. 11).

--- Page 20 ---
414 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
achieve their objectives. This is because the person would join a fundamentalist sect if it
church uses stigmas as a way of screening out is costly to do so. He focuses on how behav-
those who are most likely to stay free-riders, ioral rules arise in fundamentalist groups
concentrating its efforts and managing those and makes several predictions that are rele-
who might invest in the church later, even if vant to study the growth of fundamentalism.
they free ride in their consumption of reli- Unproductive costs (such as sacrifice, stigma,
gious goods in the present. Moreover, as an behavioral rules) perform two functions—
individual’s religious capital increases, the they screen out people whose participation
incentive to free ride diminishes.23 would otherwise be low and they increase
Models of religious strictness examine participation among those who do join. His
how and why groups become more or less model predicts that sectarian groups will dis-
strict. Levy and Razin (2012) examine the proportionately attract poor, less educated,
relationship between how religions instill and minority members of the society; that
religious beliefs, participation, and coopera- a general decline in secular opportunities
tion. They show that more demanding reli- (for example an economic recession) will
gious groups are smaller, more cohesive, and encourage the growth of sects. His model
comprise those with extreme beliefs. Models also predicts that the most successful sects
of strictness are very useful, but it seems to maintain an optimal level of tension with the
me that there is a lack of evolutionary mod- surrounding society, i.e., they set an optimal
els that examine how strict groups grow. In level of cost for any target population. Finally,
this context, one area that is still relatively a sect can prohibit only those commodities
underresearched is the economic theory for which it offers a close substitute—arbi-
on extremism (Berman 2009; Berman and trary strictness fails just as much as excessive
Laitin 2008; Ferrero 2005). There are papers strictness. As Iannaccone writes, “sectarian
that address this issue in the context of the religion appeals to people not because the
evolution of fundamentalism, such as Arce people have deviant wants, but because the
and Sandler (2003, 2009), Epstein and Gang sects provide a collective setting in which
(2007), and Iannaccone (1997). Although it normal, but unsatisfied, wants can be met.”
is to be acknowledged that there are many One of the key benefits of being a member
different definitions of fundamentalism, of a sect is access to the network. Iannaccone
Iannaccone (1997) defines fundamentalism and Berman (2006) take these ideas forward
as “the degree to which a group demands sac- even further to explain why religious extrem-
rifice and stigma or, equivalently, the degree ists sometimes, but not always, engage in
to which it limits and thereby increases the violent activities: “Sects are high-powered
cost of nongroup activities.”24 religious organizations, run by credible lead-
Iannaccone (1997) takes forward the ideas ers and peopled by active members carefully
in his 1992 paper to examine why a rational screened for commitment. Sad to say, these
same institutional attributes are also keys
to the successful ‘production’ of organized
23 Related to the club goods models by Iannaccone
(1992), Iannaccone (1997), Iannaccone and Berman violence, especially clandestine violence.”
(2006), and Makowsky (2012) are other papers that exam- (pp. 119–120).
ine models of tolerance and intolerance such as, for exam-
One important dimension is the
ple, Cerqueti, Correani, and Garofalo (2013).
24 It should be acknowledged that fundamentalism is role of social networks. For example, a
a term that means different things to different people. well-established literature in related disci-
The six volume Martin Marty–Scott Appleby collection
plines such as sociology has found social net-
(1994–2004) deals with all the controversies of definition
and intricacies of the issues involved. works to be important for religion, religious

--- Page 21 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 415
conversion, and recruitment, and yet this that the role of social norms, social networks,
work often lacks formal theoretical models in and social pressures need to be considered
the spirit of economics, or handles selection more carefully.
effects imperfectly in empirical research. It is The economic theory of religious norms
here, among other areas, that economists of and networks has been widened to examine
religion have yet to contribute significantly. religious competition in the context of spe-
The main areas that many existing studies cific religious practices such as veiling among
do not examine is the role of network struc- Muslim women (Carvalho 2013; Patel 2012).
ture, the role of leadership, the authoritarian Carvalho (2013) discusses a theoretical
structure of an organization, the militancy explanation for veiling (the hijab, which are
of fundamentalists, and how fundamental- head coverings) in which this social prac-
ism might arise as a response to secularity tice is a commitment mechanism that limits
or modernity. More research, especially on temptation to deviate from religious norms
how fundamentalism spreads spatially in a of behavior. Carvalho argues that even
network structure, is needed. For example, though the rise of the new veiling movement
how isolated nodes in the society form new since the 1970s might seem counterintuitive
links with the society, how the influence as it is observed mainly among urban, edu-
of a fundamentalist leader changes over cated, and working women, this practice can
time, and so forth. While Arce and Sandler be conceived as a strategy for integration, as
(2003 and 2009) are evolutionary models it allows women to make the most of eco-
that explain how subpopulations grow and nomic opportunities outside the household
decline as a proportion of the whole popu- while permitting them to adhere to norms
lation (with the subpopulations differing in that preserve their reputation. This explains
assortativity), more research on how funda- the counterintuitive empirical finding that
mentalism spreads over the network would veiling laws have led to a decline in religi-
be useful, especially with respect to which osity and bans on veiling have been shown
parts of the network are most vulnerable. to increase religiosity. In his model, Carvalho
Of these models, Arce and Sandler (2003) shows that the demand for veiling would be
specifically examined the rise of fundamen- highest among women who are from highly
talism using a game-theoretic framework. religious groups, but who interact in highly
They divided society into two groups of “irreligious environments.” This is because
fundamentalists and others, showing that individuals may value the opinions of their
fundamentalists are more cohesive and less community, regardless of whether they
willing to compromise. They use a Nash hold those opinions themselves. And veiling
demand game for modeling the interaction emerges as a response to the greater eco-
between fundamentalists and others. Other nomic integration of women, who do not
aspects that are worth considering here are want to face social disapproval if they come
interactions between the government and from a more traditional background, and it
a fundamentalist group, the role of norms, is a practice that might prevent the agent
preference changes, and other behavioral from engaging in behavior that is religiously
criteria, perhaps looking at reputation mod- prohibited. One of the key contributions
els more closely.25 But all this does suggest is also to model the agent’s type as endog-
enously determined by their social identity.
25 It should be acknowledged that fundamentalists
do differ greatly in their economic outcomes—some in successful; others in many Arab nations are economically
Latin America and East and West Africa are economically unsuccessful.

--- Page 22 ---
416 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
So as religious values spread, even secular suggests that one factor that pushes religious
types may conform to more religious norms organizations toward more extremes is non-
of veiling behavior. The theoretical research religious service provision: religious organi-
on religious strictness and religious net- zations essentially product differentiate to
works has widened the scope of theoretical minimize competition in service provision.
models in the economics of religion, but in This model and others that use theories
my view, this still remains a comparatively from industrial organization are particularly
less-researched area in the microeconomics applicable to religion in developing coun-
of religion. tries, where inequality may be very high and
where the state cannot adequately provide
4.3 Spatial Location Models
services such as education and healthcare.
The theoretical study of religion is also The model also suggests why, as religious
well-suited to models that examine the organizations differentiate themselves more,
demand side and the supply side together, this sets up the potential for greater con-
for example, models from the economics of flict among them, which may be mitigated
industrial organization. A few papers have then by the same organizations also pro-
argued that a useful way to think about reli- viding more nonreligious services. Having
gion, such as the emergence of sects with said that, the location models also raise the
strict rules, is using Hotelling-style spatial issue of whether it is realistic to assume one
location models (see, for example, Barros religion per person. In various parts of the
and Garoupa 2002; Montgomery 2003; world, people may successfully belong to two
Barro and McCleary 2005; McBride 2010), religions, a formal religion (like Christianity)
although some of these models do not solve and a folk religion. In Africa, for example,
for the full equilibrium outcome. McBride people practice two religions at once and
(2008) uses a Hotelling model to understand may celebrate Muslim or Christian holidays,
religious pluralism and participation, dis- but also days that involve the spirits of local
cussed above. Iyer, Velu, and Weeks (2014) religions. So perhaps the location models
develop and solve a formal Hotelling-style also need to be more complex to take these
model to elucidate how religious organiza- local factors on board. All this does suggest,
tions might differentiate themselves on the though, that the whole area of applying mod-
strength of religious beliefs and its implica- els from industrial organization to the study
tions for service provision, as applied to the of religion seems ripe for further research.
context of a developing country like India.
4.4 Experiments
Their model emphasizes the dependence of
the religious decision and the service decision Reputation is a theme that emerges from
on each other: this interdependence is often both the evolutionary and current experi-
mentioned, but not always fully developed mental research on religion. Some studies
formally in the economics of religion litera- are exploring evolutionary models of religion
ture. This model is also particularly import- that examine religion as a response to evo-
ant in societies that have income inequality, lutionary behavior by groups that concern
a factor that is alluded to in many of the issues such as reputation and competition
Hotelling-style models, but again, not devel- between groups. While some of this work is
oped into the thinking as fully.26 The model
inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient is strongly
26 Examining World Values Survey data from 1981– related to religiosity as measured by the propensity to
2001, Norris and Inglehart (2004) show that economic engage in religiosity through prayer.

--- Page 23 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 417
empirical, including agent-based modeling monitoring, to the degree that it is genuinely
to explain religious regionalism (Iannaccone believed and cognitively salient, offers the
and Makowsky 2007), economists of reli- powerful advantage that cooperative interac-
gion have also been taking theory to exper- tions can be observed even in the absence of
imental data based on field and laboratory social monitoring” (Norenzayan and Shariff
experimental research. A growing number 2008, p. 58). The effect on trust is that reli-
of studies examine how religion affects gen- gious belief increases trust, decreases the
erosity, trust, and fairness toward strangers cost of monitoring, and hence increases pro-
(Anderson and Mellor 2009; Henrich et al. social behavior. They suggest that further
2010; Paciotti et al. 2011), as well as the research on issues such as empathy and com-
evolution of cooperation, such as for exam- passion, which motivate prosocial behavior,
ple among the Israeli kibbutzim (Sosis and is needed. It would also be useful to know
Ruffle 2004). Paciotti et al. (2011) present more about the substance of the religious
experiments that test if religion promotes thoughts involved, because some religions
prosocial behavior in dictator, trust, and pub- discourage free riding within the commu-
lic-goods games. Keuschnigg and Schikora nity of believers, but encourage it within
(2014) conduct an experiment on voluntary the broader community. So more research is
contributions to public goods among reli- needed on the content of religious teachings
giously heterogeneous groups in India by and if the teachings differ, the experimental
conducting a laboratory experiment to find results may then only apply to a subset of
that while cultural diversity does not affect people in the experiment.
contributions in a public-goods game, the
interaction between cultural heterogene-
ity and leadership shows that there is less 5. Identification, Secular Competition,
cooperation from followers in mixed groups. and Charitable Giving
A set of experimental studies also examine
religion’s impact on health behaviors (both In his 1998 review, Iannaccone alluded to
mental and physical), crime, and norms the possibility that religion’s statistical effects
toward charitable giving (Lambarraa and may be spurious and that “nothing short of
Riener 2012). In this context, one interest- a (probably unattainable) ‘genuine experi-
ing wide-ranging experimental study that ment’ will suffice to demonstrate religion’s
amalgamates research from anthropology, causal impact. Yet one should also recog-
experimental psychology, and economics, is nize that there exist plausible a priori argu-
that of Norenzayan and Shariff (2008), who ments for religion’s impact and that despite
examine the evolution of religion in the con- numerous attempts to root out spurious
text of prosocial behavior, i.e., good behavior correlation, many religion effects remain
towards others that might engender a cost substantively large and statistically signifi-
to the individual. They highlight the role of cant” (Iannaccone 1998, pp. 1,475 –76). For
reputation and selection that reinforces the contemporary research on religion, the prob-
relationship between religion, prosociality, lems of identifying the causal effect of reli-
and cooperation in general. Their findings giosity on economic outcomes still remains
show that if religious thoughts are imbibed in the focus of most current empirical studies.
experiments, then this increases trust as well These studies explore the effect of religious
as altruism toward strangers. The question is, competition, secular competition, and policy
why that might be the case, and they offer debates about faith-based welfare programs
one suggestion: “However, supernatural and the economic regulation of the church.

--- Page 24 ---
418 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
The difficulty of identifying the causal in Wittenberg is not always available in other
effect of religion clearly in econometric contexts. Alternatively, one can use a theoret-
studies is an important concern, as reli- ical model to ground an approach that then
gious variables do not always help pre- negates the need for an instrument, but this
dict cross-country differences in income also requires strong adherence to the model
(Durlauf, Kourtellos, and Tan 2012). This itself, and may not always be applicable to all
issue is a feature of macroeconomic and individuals. Consequently, there is no single
microeconomic research on religion (see accepted solution to the problem of religion
Hungerman 2011 for a thoughtful review and endogeneity, but a menu of options that
of the statistical issues of identification in economists can draw from.
models of religion). The main issues arise One significant study in this respect is
with respect to measurement error, reverse Gruber (2005). He highlights the potential
causality, omitted variables, missing values, difficulty of evaluating the effect of religiosity
and self-selection, which cause the covari- on economic outcomes, because of various
ates to be correlated with the errors, ren- other factors that are likely to be very highly
dering our regression estimates both biased correlated with the outcomes of interest. He
and inconsistent. Addressing endogeneity, suggests one way of getting around this issue
clear identification of religion effects and is a measure of religion market density—this
the heterogeneity of samples are important is simply the share of the population living in
concerns. The basic problem is that religi- an area that belongs to the individual’s own
osity is endogenous and many studies have religion. The idea underlying this thinking is
attempted instrumental variable strategies that if more people in your area share your
such as demographic indicators of various religion, then the social interaction effects
kinds, including religion market density, eth- might affect you more. Moreover, the den-
nic heritage, or other instrumental variables, sity itself can be exogenously predicted
to provide an exogenous source of variation. based on the ancestry in an area. Based on
There are a number of ways in which General Social Survey data from the United
economists have attempted to address the States, Gruber finds that higher market den-
issues surrounding religion and endogeneity. sity causes greater religious participation,
For example, some experimental research higher education and income, lower levels
can “prime” religion, or rely on the exoge- of welfare receipt and disability, higher mar-
nous timing of religious events such as the riage rates, and lower divorce rates.
Ramadan fasting period, as discussed below, Gruber’s (2005) identification strategy is
but this approach may not be easily general- important to the development of empirical
izable to other religions. Some researchers, work on religion, and so is reproduced below.
as discussed below, have used policy events In essence, he estimates religious attendance
such as blue laws, which are interesting in as a function of religious market density:
that they are exogenous to religiosity, but
may impact both religious and secular phe- (1) R RELIGDEN S
ia = α+β ia
nomena, so may not be ideal instruments
for religions in all situations. Some stud-
ANCESDEN S AGESDEN S
ies use distance from a historical event, as + γ ia+δ ia
discussed in section 2, but this requires an
ANCE S AGE S RELI G
assumption that the location and timing of +θ ia+λ ia+ρ ia
the event is exogenous, and a seminal histor-
ical event such as the birth of Protestantism ARE A YEA R .
+ π a+τ t+ε

--- Page 25 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 419
In this equation, R measures religious atten- refinement of his strategy, he also excludes
dance, i is the individual, a is the area in which the individual’s ancestral group when he
she lives, and t is the year. RELIGDENS is computes PRDEN so that this shows the
the percentage of the population in the area likelihood that an individual lives with her
that also belongs to individual i’s religion. coreligionists, but based as a calculation of
ANCESDENS is the density of ancestry the other ancestral groups resident in the
group, and A GESDENS is the density of the area.
age and sex composition of the group. The Gruber’s approach has many strengths,
model also includes a range of fixed effects including that if we have access to data on
for the individual’s ancestry ( ANCES ), age religion and ancestry in one dataset, such
and sex, religion, area, and year fixed effects. as for example the GSS, and ancestry and
This approach parcels out the effect of reli- outcomes (but not religion) in a another
gious market density on the individual’s own dataset, such as for example the US Census,
religious participation. This specification then these two datasets may be combined to
allows us to examine if an individual is more study religion even when data on religion is
religious if there are a higher percentage of not available in all the datasets being used
coreligionists in the same area (a higher ) for a study. It should also be acknowledged
β
compared to other religionists in the same that while the Gruber study is very important
area, and relative to other coreligionists who to empirical studies of religion, its focus is
live in other areas that have lower market on non-Hispanic white males. So while this
density. Gruber is careful to point out that, approach may be very intuitive in thinking
even with this specification, there could still about Catholics in America, it may be less
be instances of measurement error in cal- intuitive for other groups, faiths, and ethnic-
culating the relevant densities. To address ities. The value of this approach may also be
these issues, he then creates an instrument constrained if ancestry data is unavailable, or
for religious density that is based on an indi- if everyone is of the same ancestry, because
vidual’s ancestry and the ancestries of other then religious density may not be as useful if
individuals living in the area. Gruber’s instru- people are self-selecting not only on the basis
ment is: of their religion, but also on their location.
If we can identify religion effects in this
(2) PRDE N way, among others, then it allows us to
na
demonstrate the effect of religion on var-
r P ( n P ANCE S ) ious economic outcomes. For example,
= Σ [ rn× Σ rn× na ].
using a variety of identification strategies
In this equation, n denotes the ancestries, r including religious market density, sibling
denotes the religions, and a denotes the area fixed effects, and others, some studies show
in which individuals live. PRDE N is then that religious participation is associated
na
the predicted density for an ancestry group with less depression, greater happiness,
n in an area a and P is the distribution of and more mental-health stability (Mellor
rn
religious preferences r within each ancestry and Freeborn 2011). Others point to a
n . ANCE S is the density of each ancestry relationship between religion, aging, and
na
group n in each area a . Gruber’s approach health (Deaton 2011), and a lower likeli-
is important to the literature on identifica- hood of committing crimes (Gruber and
tion of religion effects because the ancestry Hungerman 2008). In this context, econo-
captures the religious density, and it also mists have also used secular variables as a
deals with measurement error. As a further way to distinguish between subpopulations,

--- Page 26 ---
420 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
identifying the effect of religiosity clearly as An alternative strategy that economists
discussed in more detail below. have used to aid identification is to examine
Exploring secular variables to obtain iden- the “charity gap”—religious giving in the con-
tification is related to the interaction between text of more general secular charitable giving.
religious competition and secular competi- The research on giving to religious charities
tion because religion may provide a form of is closely related to work on charitable giving
social insurance. Some work has examined (Andreoni 1989; Andreoni 1990). A third of
whether households who contribute to reli- charitable giving in the United States goes to
gious organizations are better able to insure religious causes (Engelberg et al. 2014); but
against income shocks (Dehejia, DeLeire, even in the United Kingdom, which is less
and Luttmer 2007). Self-insurance provided religious on average, data from the National
by religious organizations may have impli- Council for Voluntary Organisations’ UK
cations for social insurance provided by the Civil Society Almanac 2010 shows that reli-
government. There might be less demand gious and international organizations obtain
for social insurance in more religious areas, the greatest share of income from individu-
and when social insurance is being provided als; each receiving approximately 40 percent
and provided well, this might also “c rowd of their total income from individual dona-
out” insurance functions being provided by tions (NCVO/CAF 2010).
religious organizations (Hungerman 2005). In this context, Hungerman’s work (2005)
Dehejia, DeLeire, and Luttmer (2007) study has focused on the public policy implications
whether participation through contributions of the intersection between religious and
provides consumption insurance, compared charitable giving, secular institutions, taxa-
to participation through attendance that pro- tion, and public spending. His focus is on how
vides happiness insurance against income religious institutions may compete with other
shocks, using data from the US Consumer secular institutions such as schools, local
Expenditure Survey from 1986–2000. In their government, or shopping malls, which may
survey, they find that religious contributions be even more important than competition
represent about 1.2 percent of household between religious organizations themselves.
income. They also find some limited evidence He finds that congregations in his survey
that the form of insurance provided by orga- are more concerned with secular competi-
nizations differs by race. Norris and Inglehart tion than with competition from other reli-
(2004) provide cross-sectional evidence that gious groups (Hungerman 2011). This work
rising state coverage, for example health-care also stems from a methodological concern to
plans or pensions, decreases religiosity. Chen find instrumental variables that identify the
(2010) presents religious groups as providing effect on religion of policy changes ostensi-
insurance benefits. Related to thinking about bly unrelated to religiosity or demograph-
religion as insurance, research on Protestants ics. Hungerman’s research examines policy
in the United States has assessed whether changes that concern formal governmental
changes in the business cycle affect religi- regulation of religion, especially the United
osity by examining the relationship between States’ blue laws, which controlled economic
macroeconomic conditions and Protestant and other activities on Sundays and resulted
religiosity, finding a countercyclical compo- in decreases in religious participation. Gruber
nent to participation in evangelical Protestant and Hungerman (2007) examine historic pub-
denominations, mainly due to lower socioeco- lic goods provision in the Great Depression;
nomic status, and a p rocyclical c omponent they argue that such provision can crowd
for mainline Protestants (Beckworth 2009). out religious provision of these goods.

--- Page 27 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 421
Hungerman (2014) has pursued these Based on US Protestant denominations in
identification issues further, showing how the 2005, and focusing on their foreign opera-
club-goods model can be used to generate tions, they show that religious denomina-
an empirical test for whether religious rules tional strictness attracts more adherents
and proscriptions alter people’s behavior. where service provision is weaker and where
The test allows rigorous study of this topic, the risk of vulnerability through disease or
even in settings where exogenous changes diasters is higher.
in religious rules are unavailable, i.e., where While this paper dealt with Christian
it is difficult to find an instrumental variable churches, another series of papers looks
for religiosity. Religious individuals may at Islam, using the exogenous timing of
be more responsive to variation in secular Ramadan to explore the effects of religious
incentives such as, for example, changes in fasting on outcomes (Oosterbeek and van der
blue laws, casino openings, and variations in Klaauw 2013; Almond and Mazumder 2011;
laws that concern the minimum legal drink- Majid 2013).27 These papers take advantage
ing age. Highly religious individuals are very of Ramadan as a treatment variable and their
responsive to changes in secular incentives. contribution is important both conceptually,
These identification issues continue to be in terms of examining the effect of Ramadan
very important in the context of empirical practices in Islam on educational and other
research on religion. economic outcomes, and econometrically, in
In this context, one study examines the terms of having found a way to identify the
structure within religious organizations effects of religion on outcomes that takes
themselves—notably, whether religious advantage of the exogenous timing of the
personnel, such as pastors, and their labor fasting period. For example, Oosterbeek and
inputs have a causal effect on religious atten- van der Klaauw (2013) estimate the effect
dance and church growth (Engelberg et al. of Ramadan on the educational outcomes
2014). This study examines Methodist con- of economics students who are Muslim but
gregations in Oklahoma between 1961 and who live in the Netherlands, and where
2003, showing that better pastors sizably teaching and exam dates are not adjusted
and significantly increase church growth, for the fasting period, as is the case in coun-
and that a pastor’s performance in his first tries that are Muslim. The fast is expected to
church, which is usually randomly assigned reduce academic performance because the
in Methodist groups, predicts significantly students have less nutrition, hence may be
their future performance, so that while pas- less able to concentrate and to study. They
tor effects are important in churches that examine data over five academic years from
are both large and small, better-performing 2003–08 and use a difference-in-difference
pastors are invariably assigned to larger con- framework that uses the number of fasting
gregations. The study observes a particular weeks over the duration of an introductory
church under the tenure of different pastors. microeconomics course, and which varies
This study overcomes identification issues by yearly. If students observe Ramadan, then
using the random assignment of pastors in this has a negative impact on their academic
their first church in order to predict subse-
quent performance. Another carefully done
empirical paper is Hanson and Xiang (2013), 27 Ramadan is a religious fast undertaken by Muslim
which examines how a denomination’s men and women for about a month each year, in which
they eschew all food and drink between sunrise and sun-
doctrine, as well as its governance structure,
set. The fast is undertaken to encourage patience and piety,
influences its capacity to attract adherents. and the timing of Ramadan follows the Islamic calendar.

--- Page 28 ---
422 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
achievement, reducing the final grades of direct effects of reduced nutritional intake
Muslim students by approximately 10 per- having an impact on productivity, Ramadan
cent of a standard deviation. Interestingly, affects the relative preferences of Muslims
there is no difference between male and between work and religiosity by changing
female students, and the Ramadan effect is beliefs that may influence labor-market
not caused by lower attendance in the intro- choices.
ductory microeconomics course. Studies that use Ramadan fasting sys-
Majid (2013) studies the effects of in utero tematically exploit the timing of the fast-
exposure to Ramadan fasting over the life ing period and the geographic location of
cycle and finds very significant school per- countries that observe Ramadan rules as
formance differences among Indonesians in an exogenous source of variation. Yet this
during childhood and in the labor market in type of tidy exogenous instrument may not
adulthood, based on whether mothers fasted always be available for other religions. What
during pregnancy and when they fasted. we have learned from all of these empirical
Children whose mothers fasted also had studies of different religions is that econo-
lower birth weight, performed more child mists are coming up with innovative ideas
labor, and scored lower on cognitive tests, to aid identification, whether by relying on
suggesting that the practice of mothers fast- innovative instruments that are drawn from
ing during pregnancy should be minimized. religious, ancestral, or secular factors, or by
Almond and Mazumder (2011) show that deferring to long-standing religious prac-
for Arab parents in Michigan in the United tices, to demonstrate causally the effect of
States between 1989 and 2006, mothers’ religion on various educational, health, labor
prenatal adoption of Ramadan fasting rules market, and other economic outcomes.
causes lower birth weight in babies, although
the magnitude of these effects is small. The
6. Conflict and Cooperation in Developing
timing of prenatal nutrition is important
Societies
here, as Almond and Mazumder compare
births that overlap with Ramadan fasting Most research in the economics of religion
with those that do not, estimating a reduced- has focused on developed countries. With
form effect of Ramadan on births. They esti- the availability of new data, economists now
mate an intent-to-treat effect that does not are examining particular religions in varied
rely, for identification, on the decision to fast. historical time periods, also drawing lessons
They also examine Census data on Muslims from this experience for religious networks
in Uganda in 2002 and in Iraq in 1997 to in contemporary developing societies. This
show that adults there are 20 percent more literature has focused both on conflict and
likely to be disabled or to have mental or on cooperation engendered by religion, and
learning disabilities with even larger effects is an exciting area of research in the econom-
if the first month of their mothers’ pregnan- ics of religion. In this section I discuss the
cies coincided with the Ramadan fasting literature on terrorism; trade, politics, and
month. Some studies of Ramadan fasting conflict; religiously provided social services;
investigate macroeconomic outcomes. For religion and finance; and I make the case
example, Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott for the need for a wider scope in our studies
(2013) study whether Ramadan fasting has a in the economics of religion on developing
negative effect on output growth in Muslim societies.
countries, and if it increases subjective At the time of writing Iannaccone’s 1998
well-being. They argue that rather than the survey and subsequently in other reviews

--- Page 29 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 423
(Iannaccone and Berman 2008; Iyer 2008), model to show how this is related to factors
the point was made that most religion such as aspirations, education, public-sector
research is on the United States and other employment, and inequality.
developed countries in the Western world. Examining conflict and cooperation in
There is still a great need for studies on developing societies has been aided by the
Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and availability of much better data. Sociologists
Asia. There is notable work on the Middle and political scientists have been very active
East with a range of work by Kuran (2010), in using data to address important issues that
Chaney (2013), El-Gamal (2006), and others; concern international religious freedoms
and a few studies of India and China (Yang and religious restrictions.28 These include
2012). From the perspective of developing the relationship between religious institu-
societies, or those in which there is greater tions and the state, whether the state per-
uncertainty, economics is valuable because mits religious freedom or forms alliances
it illustrates how religion and religious with certain religions, and movements that
norms might act as an informal coordinating might restrict those freedoms (Finke 2013).
mechanism. The kind of spontaneous social This research also examines the conse-
coordination that religion creates through quences of restrictions for religious conflict.
increasing trust, morals, informal incentives In early work, Finke (1990) and Finke and
or through imposing social sanctions are very Stark (1992) argued that religious freedoms
important in these societies, especially when in the United States led to the “churching
there is an absence of well-developed legal of America” because religious freedoms
systems and formal markets. In this context, increased the supply of religion by altering
the relationship between religion and pub- the incentives for both religious producers
lic-goods provision is an important focus that and consumers. Finke (2013) takes this argu-
economics brings to a discussion of religion. ment further by examining the relationship
Studies in this area include Berman (2009) between religious freedoms and social con-
and Iyer, Velu, and Mumit (2014), which flict, specifically whether countries have laws
highlight the important but less-studied area that restrict religious freedoms. Finke (2013)
of religion and service provision in contem- points out that how the state views religion
porary developing countries. Other studies or minority groups may affect whether they
focus more specifically on religious beliefs. promote or hinder religious freedoms, and
For example, Clingingsmith, Khwaja, and that whether states have the institutional
Kremer (2009) examine whether participa- capacity to enforce religious freedoms,
tion in the hajj (the pilgrimage to Mecca) including whether a country has an inde-
as decided by a lottery among Pakistani pendent judiciary, is important. Religious
pilgrims has effects on religious practices. restrictions may also alter how organizations
The hajj participation increases orthodox function, and religious market structure
Islamic rituals such as prayer and fasting, but more widely, including by affecting religious
also increases tolerance towards other eth- persecution (Finke 2013; Grim and Finke
nic groups and others’ religions in general, 2011). Grim and Finke (2011) document
as well as more benign attitudes towards that many people in the world have been fac-
women. Studies of religious revival move- ing an increase in persecution. This interest
ments among the middle classes, for exam-
ple in Egypt, show how development might
28 For example, Roger Finke (2013) defines religious
make societies more prone to religious reviv-
freedoms as the “unrestricted practice, profession and
als. Binzel and Carvalho (2013) develop a selection of religion” (p. 299).

--- Page 30 ---
424 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
in religious freedoms and restrictions is also very few deaths, relative to other kinds of
echoed in the recent literature from politi- hazards, and there is frequently a cyclical
cal science. For example, Fox and Tabory pattern to transnational terrorism. The data
(2008) used the Religion and State dataset show that terrorist incidents come in waves
between 1990 and 2002 to argue that state and cycles due to demonstration effects; and
support for religion affected religious plu- because of economies of scale in planning
ralism and that state regulation of religion is terrorist attacks, this can lead to terrorist
negatively correlated with religiosity if reli- incidents being clumped together. Although
giosity is measured by religious attendance, the question of terrorism is separate from,
although they also find that religious beliefs but related to religion, one of the interesting
are affected less. findings of the research in terrorism is that
religion-based terrorist groups have been
6.1 Terrorism
seeing a rise in more recent decades. For
Empirical research has been exploring example, since the early 1980s, the number
the links between religion, economics, and of terrorist groups that are religion-based
terrorism, both within and across national have risen from two out of sixty-four groups
boundaries (Berman and Laitin 2004; in 1980 to twenty-five out of fifty-eight
Sandler and Enders 2004; Krueger 2007; groups in 1995 (Sandler and Enders 2004,
Keefer and Loayza 2008; Berman 2009). p. 305 citing Hoffman). Forming global net-
In particular, Krueger (2007) investigated works is also important here. For example,
whether income was related to transnational terrorists can limit how effective countries
terrorism. The general conclusion that are in counteracting terrorists because the
emerged in this work is that weak property externalities are greatest when countries are
rights and poor civil liberties might matter more uncoordinated in their decision mak-
more for the incidence of international ter- ing to counteract terrorism.
rorism than poverty. Berman (2009) exam-
6.2 Trade, Politics, and Conflict
ined terrorism in the Middle East, arguing
that many religious groups such as, for The concern with conflict all over the
example, the Hamas, provide spiritual ser- developing world is very much a product of
vices alongside social and welfare services its historical evolution. For example, very
in the regions where they operate. Sandler useful insights have been gained by focusing
and Enders (2004) provide an economic on Islam and on Judaism. Michalopoulos,
perspective on transnational terrorism.29 Naghavi, and Prarolo (2016) provide a con-
They argue that transnational terrorist inci- ceptual framework to think about how Islam
dents are transboundary externalities, to the is related to inequality and preindustrial
extent that any actions undertaken by coun- comparative development. They show that
try authorities or terrorists in one country Muslim societies were located along geo-
can impose costs and benefits on other coun- graphically unequal territories near trade
tries. Antiterrorist activities might some- routes, and theoretically demonstrate how
times create unintended consequences. this might have influenced Islamic thought.
Transnational terrorism actually results in Trade routes created different opportunities
for areas with dissimilar geographies, such as
between areas of fertile and arid land. If there
29 Sandler and Enders (2004) define terrorism as “the was unequal land distribution with trade,
premeditated use, or threat of use, of extranormal violence
this encouraged predatory behavior by less
to obtain a political objective through intimidation or fear
directed at a large audience” (p. 302). well-endowed regions. This caused patterns

--- Page 31 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 425
of static and dynamic income redistribution Some theoretical work has linked religion
that emphasized direct transfers of income. and politics—for example, how politicians
So for Islam to persist, income inequality had have an incentive to take an extreme stand on
to be restrained and this influenced dynamic issues that might be proscribed by some reli-
income redistribution through rules and gions, such as abortion or same-sex marriage,
religious prescriptions on capital accumu- in order to induce their core supporters to
lation and increased public-goods provision vote and make donations (Glaeser, Ponzetto,
through endowments from religious insti- and Shapiro 2005). Empirical studies high-
tutions. Consequently, Islam put forward light the political importance of religious
various obligations and laws for income redis- leaders. For example, Chaney (2013) pro-
tribution and poverty alleviation through the vides the first illustration from economic
zakat, costs on accumulating capital such as history that the political power of religious
the anti-riba (interest) laws that increased leaders may be important when there are
transactions costs, and contributions to economic downturns. He argues that during
waq fs. In turn, Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and floods that are deviant to normal flood lev-
Prarolo argue that this affected preindustrial els of the Nile river, allocations to religious
economic development in Islamic countries; structures, compared to secular structures,
this compares to countries in which although increase. Religious authorities were also less
Christianity initially enforced laws against likely to be replaced. Judges were less likely
usury, the relaxation of usury laws in Europe to be dismissed by the sovereign or to resign
preceded the Reformation by 150–200 years, when the Nile flood was abnormally high or
indicating that it was not something about low. This is because the Nile floods increased
the Reformation, but a deeper institutional the propensity for social unrest and the pos-
difference between the Middle East and sibility that the religious leader could coordi-
Western Europe that was the cause for the nate a revolt. These findings are consonant
divergence between them (Rubin 2011). But with a wider literature on conflict that sug-
more generally, more research is needed on gests that economic crises precipitate the
the interactions between religion, trust, and collapse of autocratic regimes because they
cooperation (Gagnon 2014). disrupt the balance of political power. In
One theme that unites many economic his- this case, Chaney argues that power moved
tory studies of religion is conflict and cooper- in favor of religious authorities in historical
ation. Some studies relevant here are those Egypt. This resonates with current debates
that examine Israeli communes such as the about the rise of the Arab Spring. This work
kibbutz (Abramitzky 2008 and 2009) because is important in the context of wider research
these communes are based on an ideology that demonstrates that religious leaders in
that stresses cooperation and minimizes con- historical populations may have exercised
flict. Other research examines the histori- considerable political patronage and power.
cal basis of conflict and the role of religion
6.3 Religiously Provided Social Services
and empire in these contexts (Iyigun 2008),
studying especially the rise of monotheism, While religion may have an influence
which provided economic and political ben- on conflict, it also affects cooperation by
efits. Iyigun (2008) shows how Ottoman mil- providing access to services. For example,
itary activities between the 1520s and 1650s many religious groups have provided social
reduced intra-European religious conflict by services such as education, as shown in a
over 50 percent and also reduced conflicts in national study of congregations in the United
Europe more generally. States (Chaves 2004) and in other research

--- Page 32 ---
426 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
on secular and religious competition in ser- both forms it served as a safety net, reducing
vice provision (Hungerman 2005). In the conflict.
developing world, the Hamas have provided One interesting question Kuran (2004)
spiritual services alongside social and welfare addresses is why the West did better eco-
services in the regions where they operate nomically than the Middle East. The devel-
(Berman 2009). In contemporary India, in opment of financial institutions in the Middle
the first large-scale study of the econom- East has influenced economic development
ics of religion there, religious networks are in this region, relative to other parts of the
important not only for the religious services world. The Middle East developed institu-
they provide, but equally and especially for tions from about the seventh through the
their nonreligious services, specifically with ninth centuries; Western Europe did so by
respect to health and education (Iyer, Velu, about the tenth century. By the eighteenth
and Weeks 2014; Iyer, Velu, and Mumit century, the Middle East showed many signs
2014). Moreover, as religious institutions of economic backwardness, mainly due to
provide this insurance function, these net- its social mechanisms and legal institutions,
works might then determine the extent to which had stagnated. The main culprits were
which education or health care is taken the law of inheritance under Islam, which
up, especially where these services are less hindered capital accumulation; and the waq f
well-provided for by the state.30 institution, which used up resources in an
organization to provide social services that
6.4 Religion and Finance
were often unproductive. Traditional Islamic
One aspect of development that seems par- law also had a role to play because it causes
ticularly salient is the financing of religious low human capital and inhibits the develop-
activity and how religion might influence ment of the private sector.
financial institutions in developing societies. The features of these societies in particular
For Islam, there have been detailed investi- include contract law on the joint ownership
gations by economic historians into financial of property; finance that was provided with-
systems in the Middle East including zakat, out banks and in the absence of corporate
the alms for charity (Kuran 2004; Kuran structures; Islamic law that only recognized
2010; Kuran 2014). Kuran points out that individuals; and public or semipublic goods
zakat emerged as a religious tax in seventh not being provided by the state. This was
century Arabia; it was mandatory and paid coupled with an inheritance system, arbitrary
to the Islamic state. Within a few decades, taxation that was unsystematic in its discrimi-
the obligation stopped being enforced by the nation, and weak property rights. In the case
state and the tax metamorphosed, in essence, of the inheritance system, an egalitarian sys-
into a voluntary act. There are efforts in the tem limits the concentration of wealth, but
twentieth and twenty-first centuries to make the net effect of this was the fragmentation of
it mandatory again. Zakat is relevant to stud- wealth, especially financial wealth. In the case
ies of conflict and cooperation because in of the waq f, this was a pious foundation or an
unincorporated Islamic trust. Its role was very
much to provide social services by turning
some forms of property into an endowment to
30 Religion and service provision is an important aspect
of current research in religion because religions do argue support various kinds of social services such
that social services are either only a means to attain spiri- as a mosque, a school, and so forth. The pro-
tual ends, to promote religious conversion, or as a moral
vision was quite egalitarian in that the services
imperative and so an end in itself, regardless of whether
those who are served convert to the religion. were provided to Muslims and non-Muslims.

--- Page 33 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 427
According to Kuran (2004), the waq f is legal infrastructure was self-enforcing in that
an interesting Islamic institution because there was little incentive to change the infra-
it arose as a response to poor private prop- structure. So the very legal structures that
erty rights. As he points out, Islam’s original pushed the Islamic world ahead for centuries
institutions do not include the waq f, which following the initial spread of Islam were also
the Qur’an does not mention. However, the precisely the ones that helped keep it behind
waq f is regarded as sacred because it served as Western Europe moved ahead. But this
important charitable purposes; the rulers did research does suggest that the whole rela-
not confiscate the assets of the waq f, as rul- tionship between Islam and economic per-
ers were keen to appear devout. The other formance needs more careful review—see
advantage of the waq f was that if a prop- Kuran (2014) for an overview of the histor-
erty was endowed as a waq f, this provided ical and contemporary links between Islam
it with some immunity against expropria- and economic performance.
tion. Moreover, while there was no formal More contemporaneously, Iannaccone
legal obligation, the rulers did encourage the and Bose (2011) argue that Christian reli-
waq fs to provide social services. gions can be contrasted with non-Christian
Kuran (2010) argues that in addition to ones such as Hinduism, Buddhism, and
the static effects discussed, more impor- Islam, which has implications for how fees
tantly over the longer run, the static effects for religious membership are calculated.
jointly produced negative dynamic effects. Here they develop alternative models to the
The incentives to generate more advanced rational choice approach including “client–
and flexible organizational forms suitable practitioner” relationships where individual
to modern development were supressed. religious goals can be attained without nec-
While this was not a handicap in the Middle essarily requiring collective participation in
Ages, it became a handicap when the West religious services or other practical forms
developed and technologies changed. He of religious observance. So they argue that
also points out that one difference was that religions that obtain donations for certain
Western establishments were larger than services individually performed are differ-
those in the Middle East. There were also no ent from those who charge membership
stock markets or banks in the Middle East. fees or are government funded. Again, while
The waq f system did not provide as much by we have learned much about religion and
way of public goods services as in the West, finance historically, it would be useful to
which saw the development of more organi- have more studies that document these links
zations that were chartered as corporations. for contemporary populations.
The waq f system also led to corruption. It
6.5 The Need for a Wider Scope
had a positive and a negative side—on the
one hand creating a nongovernmental orga- In assessing the economic history of reli-
nization; on the other creating social ineffi- gion research, it is very striking that much
ciency. The rule of law was limited; although more has been done on the economics of
the two systems started out with similar Islam than on the economics of Hinduism,
contract law, due to different inheritance Buddhism, Jainism, or Sikhism. This seems
regimes, they followed very different evolu- unusual, especially for Hinduism, as this is
tionary paths. By the nineteenth century, the equally a very ancient religion and there is
region’s legal infrastructure prevented the much interest in this subject both in South
organizations’ becoming more sophisticated Asia, and in other countries that have Hindu
and accumulating capital. Moreover, the populations. For example, while Hindus

--- Page 34 ---
428 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
make up about 15 percent of the world’s Muslims had when shipping via the Indian
population, they make up over 80 percent Ocean, due to their coordination with over-
of the population of India. This compares to seas markets through pilgrimages such as the
Muslims who are approximately 23 percent hajj. Although medieval trading ports were
of the world’s population and about 15 per- more heterogeneous ethnically, they were
cent of India’s population. Nevertheless five times less prone to Hindu–Muslim riots
the economics of Islam seems to gain a dis- and 25 percent less likely than other towns
proportionate amount of academic atten- to experience a religious riot between 1850
tion versus the economics of Hinduism. and 1950. Jha attributes this to the persistent
One possibility for this dearth of interest in good institutions which arose in earlier peri-
Hinduism may simply be that India has done ods and supported and encouraged medie-
well economically, so possibly when a soci- val trade among ethnic groups. This caused
ety is moving ahead, one is less interested in some cities like Surat to exhibit greater
deep forces that might have held it back in communal amity many decades later, com-
past centuries. A few economic history stud- pared to cities like Ahmedabad. The general
ies that do look at Hindu groups more are theme that trade promotes interethnic and
those by Jha (2013); and Kuran and Singh interreligious tolerance is of course a more
(2013). Recent works by Iyer (2002) and general argument that goes back to Albert
Iyer, Velu, and Weeks (2014) discuss more Hirschman’s The Passions and the Interests
contemporary Hindu populations. If the (1977), and as we learn from Hirschman, to
work on Hinduism is limited, the work on the giant thinkers of the Scottish and French
Buddhism is even more so, although with the Enlightenment. Early economists under-
notable exception of McCleary and van der stood that trade also reduces conflict, which
Kuijp (2010) on Tibet. It would also be very then facilitates trade, creating a virtuous
useful to have more research conducted on cycle. A broader policy implication is that
religion in China, certainly in the context of places that suffer conflict can be helped in
an increase in economic growth and dimin- the long run through policies that promote
ished state repression, which could lead to a trade. Therefore, good economics can foster
growing market for religion (Yang 2012). good politics.
One theme that comes up repeatedly in This argument is relevant to public goods
developing countries is the ability of reli- provision more generally, as well. Iyer,
gion not only to foster conflict, but equally Velu, and Weeks (2014) provide evidence
to mitigate it and foster cooperation. This for religious competition and cooperation
finds echo in economic history too—an in contemporary India by examining reli-
important study explores how religious and gious and nonreligious service provision.
occupational activities fostered coopera- Based on primary survey data on Indian
tion in the context of European medieval religious organizations collected between
institutions such as craft guilds (Richardson 2006 and 2010 spread across seven major
and McBride 2009). This theme is echoed states, the study shows that religious orga-
also in work on medieval India. For exam- nizations are differentiating themselves on
ple, Jha (2013) presents an overview of how the strength of religious beliefs with respect
interethnic complementarities in medieval to other organizations, and are also provid-
trading ports led to better institutions and ing higher education and health services
cooperation which minimized the chance in response to religious competition and
of Hindu–Muslim conflict many centuries as economic inequality increases in India.
later. This arose due to specific advantages Another vehicle for fostering cooperation

--- Page 35 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 429
is education; one study examines the rela- and Wydick (2014), which examines the
tionship between religion and education, operation of child sponsorship programs
emphasizing how religious norms can hin- that are a resource transfer from wealthy
der or encourage some religious groups to countries to children in developing coun-
bolster their human capital compared with tries, conducted through local churches,
other groups in the same regions (Botticini and which have strong impacts on adult out-
and Eckstein 2005). Another example from comes including schooling, employment,
India, Chaudhary and Rubin (2011), discuss and leadership within the community. This
the relationship between reading, writing, work compares Bolivia, Kenya, India, and
and religion in colonial India. They contend Indonesia and examines how these pro-
that those Indian districts that experienced grams develop aspirations among spon-
a more recent collapse of Muslim political sored children. This work is exciting not
authority also had better religious authori- only because it explores a new territory for
ties who established religious schools. These religion research, but also because it uses
schools were able to attract more Muslim innovative psychological data in children
students, but were less able to promote lit- including their drawings and self-portraits
eracy than state secular schools. This may and spiritual changes including religious
be one of the reasons for the persistence of instruction that are correlated with better
institutions that account for lower literacy outcomes in adulthood. Child sponsorship
rates among Muslim communities. It could is correlated with educational aspirations
be that some Muslim students choose reli- in Kenya and the authors’ analysis of chil-
gious schools as an indication of piety, but dren’s drawings shows that this also exerts
again this explanation is not applicable to an impact on self-esteem, happiness, and
India, as Muslim children would also have hopefulness in Indonesia. The research is
had access to all public goods, whether pro- important from a policy perspective, as it
vided for by the state or by religious author- highlights how aspirations and self-efficacy
ities. The authors’ explanation is important can be developed in children in developing
because it does not emphasize an explanation countries, both through secular as well as
based on the “pure religion effect” of Islam; religious programs.
rather it is a much more nuanced view that Another paper on Africa that also uses an
argues that literacy could be determined by innovative design in the form of language
the interaction of religious authorities, polit- priming from social psychology in an eco-
ical groups, and educational institutions. In nomics experimental design is Lambarraa
related work, Chaudhary and Rubin (2013) and Riener (2012). This study examines char-
also examine the mechanisms through which itable giving in the form of the zakat and the
a ruler’s identity in the Indian Princely States sadaqah among Muslims in educational insti-
affected public goods provision in the early tutions in Morocco, showing how language,
twentieth century. This theme of the links the publicity of donations, and the salience
between religious authorities and political of Islamic values is important to amounts
power seems a recurrent theme in the eco- of giving. In their experimental treatments
nomics of religion literature. where Islamic values were salient, anonym-
If the research by economists on South ity of donations increased donations as well
Asian religions is limited, then the work as the average level of donations, suggesting
on Africa is even more so. One exception that while the norms of charitable giving in
that compares different developing coun- Islam encourage giving, equally Islam dis-
tries is a recent paper by Glewwe, Ross, courages public displays of giving.

--- Page 36 ---
430 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
There is an important caveat here, though. belief formation, even though beliefs are cen-
Most donations for public goods in Islamic tral to all religions. And Iannaccone argued
societies were traditionally through waq fs that if progress was to be made on these
(Kuran 2004). In fact, until modern times, gaps, then economists needed not just better
most public goods were supplied through models, but greater emphasis on empirical
waq fs funded by individuals. None did so work that was initiated by the sociologists of
anonymously. In fact, with very few excep- religion. If we evaluate the progress on the
tions, donors gave their own names to the lacunae that Iannaccone’s survey identified,
public good, whether a mosque, school, then it seems that as economists of religion,
park, water fountain, and so forth. Donations we have made progress in coming up with
through waq fs were far more important better models and testing them empirically.
empirically than charity. It is also worth not- But on Iannacone’s three basic gaps, I think
ing that major donations within Islam today, we may still have some way to go.
especially religious donations, carry the name In evaluating the lessons from research
of the founder. So for instance, while mosques conducted since Iannaccone’s paper, this
always have names, small-scale charity might paper argues that religion continues to persist
be anonymous. This is perhaps more consis- and that it is necessary to survey the research
tent with some of the work on the United that has been done on the economics of reli-
States that suggests that people also give for gion over the last couple of decades. It has
public recognition (Andreoni 2001). But the attempted a selective review of this litera-
whole area of interesting differences between ture. Although much research is being con-
religious giving in a developed-country con- ducted on the economics of religion, there
text from that in an Islamic country context are a number of unanswered questions for
is worth exploring further. There is thus future research that remain. First, what does
research that is being conducted on the eco- it really mean to be religious? Is it intrinsic
nomics of religion in developing regions that or more socially driven? Second, at a macro
draws both on their economic history and on level, we have seen a great deal of economic
their current development concerns. development across a range of countries,
and yet religion seems both very pervasive
and persistent. Why is religion still so per-
7. Unanswered Questions for Future
vasive and persistent even as countries are
Research
becoming richer? If it is the case that richer
“The learned have their superstitions, countries are becoming more secular, but
prominent among them a belief that super- the world is becoming more religious, then
stition is evaporating” (Wills 1990, p. 15 as more work on the secularization hypothesis,
cited in Warner 1993, p. 1046). and how it interacts with factors like income
In his 1998 review, Iannaccone pointed out inequality, is needed. Third, especially in
that several gaps existed in the economics of non-Christian and non-Western societies,
religion research agenda—the first gap was such as for example in India or China, what
that economics research had “sidestepped” might make the nature of religion there sim-
the substance of religion and had not given ilar to or different from the United States or
enough thought to using broader concep- northwestern Europe? We need to further
tions of religion into formal models. The sec- our understanding of the economics of Islam,
ond gap was that religious uncertainty had Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism,
not been formally analyzed. The third gap and tribal religions, especially in Africa, the
was that economists had not said much about Middle East, and South Asia. In this context,

--- Page 37 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 431
there are four areas of research that I argue secular or moderate societies (Norris and
are still relatively underresearched by econ- Inglehart 2004, p. 232). Of course, it is to
omists of religion: (1) religion and demog- be acknowledged that there is a very large
raphy; (2) religion, political processes, and demographic literature on this topic, but it
their interactions with economic processes; is still striking that economists have focused
(3) the marketing, management, and com- rather less on this particular issue than might
munication aspects of religion; and (4) how have been expected. Identification concerns
the economics of religion can contribute to probably explain much of this, but since
broader debates about science and religion. over 84 percent of the world’s population
Religion and demography is an area where currently report a religious affiliation (Pew
identification issues arise, and which is com- Forum on Religion and Public Life 2012),
paratively less explored by economists of more research on religion and demography
religion. Neuman and Ziderman (1986), clearly would be welcome. Specifically, it
Neuman (2007), Lehrer and Chiswick would be important to evaluate the balance
(1993), Adsera (2006), Iyer (2002), Lehrer between a “pure religion effect” on fertil-
(2009), Trinitapoli and Weinreb (2012), and ity, and other factors such as the socioeco-
Berman, Iannaccone, and Ragusa (2014) nomic characteristics of different religious
are some studies that have explored the role groups, their minority group status and its
of religion in demography in a variety of effects on fertility, mortality, and migration.
regions including Israel, Spain, India, Africa, The demographic composition of popula-
Europe, and the United States. Iyer (2002) tions, especially in developing countries and
examines religious differences in the age at with their consequences of population aging,
marriage, contraceptive choices, and fertility will still need to be understood more fully.
rates among Hindu and Muslim women in Looking more at the links between religion
South India, showing that the effect of reli- and demography echoes what was suggested
gion, though important, is still outweighed first by Thomas Malthus. Malthus’s theory
by the socioeconomic characteristics of reli- of population was put forward as a theory of
gious groups. Trinitapoli and Weinreb (2012) mind, and so the theology that underlies it
examine whether religion provided support contained an optimism that offset the often
and education, or whether it contributed pessimistic conclusions of the demographic
to the spread of AIDS, based on fieldwork theory.31 As Pullen (1981) argues, Malthus’s
in Malawi and drawing on surveys on other
countries in sub-Saharan Africa. They find
that individual religiosity is a key predictor 31 Malthusian theory in essence is that while population
of HIV status, and religion is used to pro- grows at a geometric rate, food supply grows at an arithme-
tic rate. It leads as Malthus discussed to the “very striking
vide interpretative depth to the disease, as
consequence” that per capita incomes fall to subsistence.
well as how religious organizations influence Hence, the only way to avoid absolute poverty is by indulg-
prevention, and in the process attract new ing in “moral restraint”—the Malthusian preventative
checks such as delayed marriage and control of smaller
members. This work also highlights the role
family size without which the positive checks of war, star-
of religious networks in handling the disease. vation, and disease would affect the population adversely.
Norris and Inglehart (2004) show that if we Malthus’s theory is often thought of as gloomy, and he him-
self described his theory thus: “The view that he has given
examine demographic indicators by type of
of human life has a melancholy hue, but he feels conscious
society, the most religious societies have the that he has drawn these dark tints from a conviction that
highest fertility rates, the lowest life expec- they are really in the picture, and not from a jaundiced eye
or an inherent spleen of disposition. The theory of mind
tancy, higher infant mortality rates, and lower
which he has sketched accounts for the existence of most
rates of male and female survival than more of the evils of life!” (Malthus 1817).

--- Page 38 ---
432 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
theory shows how population pressure helps processes, and their interaction with eco-
man develop the productive potential of the nomic processes, including political com-
land, which in turn stimulates the mind. He petition and, relatedly, conflict. Thoughtful
points out that in the original first edition of studies from political science reveal how
Malthus’s Essay there were two chapters on political leaders encourage religious freedom
theology that were removed from subsequent when such laws affect their ability to stay in
editions, but the framework underlying the power or increase economic well-being (Gill
Malthusian theory becomes more compre- 1998; 2007). Using a regression discontinuity
hensible if viewed in the context of these two design on Turkish municipalities over a six-
chapters. As Pullen writes, “It would proba- year period, Meyersson (2014) shows that
bly not be an exaggeration to say that Malthus when conservative Islamic mayors are elected
intended the Essay to be as much a theologi- in Turkey, women’s secular high school edu-
cal treatise as a treatise in economics, demog- cational attainment actually goes up, while
raphy or sociology.” (Pullen 1981, p. 52). the effects for men are much smaller. The
Apart from demography, the links between mechanism includes Islamist mayors build-
religion, human capital, and immigration ing more strictly conservative dormitories for
need to be better explored (Chiswick 2005; conservative women that make it easier for
Carvalho 2013). These links are crucial both women to attend college because their fami-
for the historical literature, specifically in lies do not object, although it should also be
the context of testing the Weber hypoth- noted that the mechanisms are not as well
esis, and in the context of contemporary understood. This effect for women is also
countries. For example, exploring the inter- persistent, influencing other decisions such
actions between labor-market decisions, as adolescent marriage. Economic studies
education, and religion for men and women show how political competition can lead to
in the United States and the links between policies that work against some minorities,
religion, marriage patterns, demography, which can influence hatred against them
and transmission of ethnic and religious (Glaeser 2005). Some studies like Chaney
traits, is important (Chiswick 2014; Lehrer (2013) do discuss the relationship between
2009; Bisin and Verdier 2000). The studies political power and religious authority,
on religion and human capital also examine but more work is needed here, especially
historical populations; for example, some for countries in the Middle East and else-
explore Jewish occupational selection using where, where these issues are most relevant.
historical data from the eighth and ninth As datasets on conflict are being collected
centuries (Botticini and Eckstein 2011). with increasing care, this will allow studies
Botticini and Eckstein (2011) show that of religion, politics, and conflict. One issue
rabbinical Judaism, which emphasized the for these studies is religion as an explana-
reading of the Torah and educating children, tory variable in a regression—our work will
influenced the subsequent economic suc- need to be more nuanced at appreciating the
cess of the Jews many centuries later. This is identification issues and some reflection on
because it allowed the selection of Jews into causality will be important, but this is a com-
professional occupations that were skilled, paratively underexplored area of research.
with high returns (Chiswick 2006). But more Third, applying theories from manage-
research on these areas, both for developed ment, marketing, and the media would be
and developing countries, is needed. a fruitful way to think about religion, as
The second area that warrants further well. Some work is making a start toward
work is the whole field of religion, political discussing these issues (Miller 2002; Iyer,

--- Page 39 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 433
Velu, and Mumit 2014; Iannaccone and Bose Arab Spring from 2010 to 2013. Gentzkow
2011; Gentzkow and Shapiro 2004; Tracey and Shapiro (2004) wrote an early paper on
2012), but it is nascent days for this field. the importance of favorability ratings and
As religious organizations are themselves the manner in which perceptions were not
becoming more professional in the way they in accordance with reality, using survey data
are presenting and marketing themselves to from Gallup Polls of over 10,000 respon-
populations globally, there seems to be a very dents in a range of Muslim countries. They
large gap in studies that blend theories from investigated whether respondents who were
the marketing and management literature, to better informed by the news media knew
examine their behavior and operations more about world events more, but overall, they
closely. This research will have profound did not find any consistent effect of media
implications for how open or regulated reli- and education on attitudes, although partic-
gious markets are likely to be in different ular news media and education had different
parts of the world. bearing on perceptions and attitudes. While
In the area of religion and management, this study was not conclusive, it does high-
one important study is that by Miller (2002). light the more general importance of investi-
Miller explores the insights that strategic gating how the media can influence religion
management theory brings to understand- through its effects on perceptions and atti-
ing religious organizations, especially how tudes. This is also related to questions con-
organizations may achieve competitive cerning religion and identity. More generally
advantage. The strategic management per- research on religion and identity, especially
spective is important, as it highlights issues how one conceives of oneself and how one is
such as reputation, undertaking change in perceived by others, is an important avenue
very traditional organizations, and the role for future research.
of networks. As Miller points out, nowadays The final area that the economics of reli-
the boundaries between religion and other gion still needs to address more fully, which
industries which scholars are interested in this article has not covered in any depth,
can often become blurred. This is because but which strikes me as being important, is
religious organizations can become more to understand how economics can contrib-
secularized, and secular organizations can ute to wider debates about the gulf between
in turn become “spiritualized” (Miller 2002, science and religion. The two are popularly
p. 437). Religious organizations will innovate regarded as not compatible mainly because
in the face of pressures that they might face, of perceptions that religious beliefs become
but how they do so determines how success- less important when scientific progress
ful their strategy is. Miller argues that the happens. Religion is often viewed as unsci-
marketing of religion often involves aspects entific because it is popularly believed that
such as credible commitments, social legit- when scientific discoveries happen, they are
imacy, market segmentation, and price dis- frequently opposed to religious practices
crimination, but that religious organizations or make them seem less believable. But
also have the ability to shape the very struc- Albert Einstein’s (1950) words are prescient:
ture of the industry through political strate- “Science without religion is lame; reli-
gies and alliances. These aspects of religious gion without science is blind.” 32 Moreover,
organizations need much further research. empirically Finke and Stark (1992) show that
A related issue here is the role of the media,
perception, and the part they play in contem-
32 Albert Einstein, Out of My Later Years, chapter 8,
porary religion, witnessed most clearly in the part 1, p. 26 (1950).

--- Page 40 ---
434 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
church membership rates increased in the them empirically. But as prominent philos-
United States over the same two centuries ophers have pointed out, where are the axi-
that witnessed vast developments in science oms themselves coming from? That is more
and technology, while education and reli- subjective. And the social sciences and the
gion are also very much correlated with each study of social structures like religion might
other. In evaluating science and religion, help us understand better the subjectivity
Stark, Iannaccone, and Finke write, that underlies or drives the creation of the
axioms and the axiomatic approach (Evans
“For most of its history, the scientific study of and Evans 2008).33 Moreover, the study of
religion was nothing of the sort. Despite the
religion suggests a common desire to help
immense antagonism expressed towards ‘faith,’
understand the physical and social world
the field itself rested almost entirely on faith.
To be sure, this faith consisted of secular doc- better. Hence, it is likely that the study of
trines, but it remained faith insofar as scholars religion will influence the scientific method
clung to the doctrine of secularization, reli- and the scientific method in turn will influ-
gious irrationality, and the incompatibility of
ence the study of religion. Although current
science and religion despite strong evidence to
research in the economics of religion has
the contrary.”
been very scientific in its approach, it has still
(Stark, Iannaccone, and Finke 1996,
not dealt with questions of beliefs, as much
p. 436).
as the membership of organized religious
The economic approach to religion is use- institutions. I think this still remains one of
ful because it brings economic ideas about the important unanswered questions in the
maximization, preferences, and notions of economics of religion.
equilibrium firmly into the picture. Stark, The economics of religion as a field
Iannaccone, and Finke suggest that “the eco- has grown in recent decades by leaps and
nomic framework provides the best context bounds. This review has attempted to sur-
in which to incorporate these constraints, vey the state of research in this field. It has
model religious behavior, and measure reli- highlighted secularization, pluralism, and
gion’s effects” (Stark, Iannaccone, and Finke economic growth; club goods, differentiated
1996, p. 437). products, and networks; issues with identifi-
My view is that the economics of reli- cation, secular competition, and charitable
gion is helpful to broader debates about giving; conflict and cooperation in develop-
science and religion (Wilson 2002). This is ing societies; and finally it elucidates unan-
because economics contributes to the study swered questions for future research in the
of religion, providing perspectives that are economics of religion. If there is one criti-
unavailable through other approaches. For cism that can be leveled at the economics of
example, science has many open questions religion literature more generally it is that
about how the natural world works. While while much of this literature takes ideas
the scientific method is leading us to more from other fields within economics and then
interesting and unanswered questions about applies them to the study of religion, there
how the world works, it is also increasing are relatively fewer ideas from this literature
uncertainty and ambiguity about it. So it
is necessary to have some kind of belief
33 As Iannaccone argued persuasively, “Although beliefs
structure to continue to investigate and to lie at the core of every religion, economists have yet to say
understand the world (Smith 2008). The much about the formation of beliefs, religious or other-
wise, nor have they given much attention to the process by
scientific method itself is axiomatic and uses
which religions seek to shape people’s beliefs and values”
theory to construct hypotheses and to test (Iannaccone 1998, p. 1491).

--- Page 41 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 435
that cross the gap the other way, i.e., where Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Rob-
inson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
an idea specific to the e conomics of reli-
Development: An Empirical Investigation.” Ameri-
gion crosses over to contribute to econom- can Economic Review 91 (5): 1369–1401.
ics more generally. To me, this suggests that Adsera, Alicia. 2006. “Marital Fertility and Religion in
Spain, 1985 and 1999.” Population Studies 60 (2):
while much research is being conducted in
205–21.
this lively and policy-relevant field, there is Aimone, Jason A., Laurence R. Iannaccone, Michael
much more work yet to be done. D. Makowsky, and Jared Rubin. 2013. “Endogenous
Group Formation via Unproductive Costs.” Review
More importantly, there is much more work
of Economic Studies 80 (4): 1215–36.
that must be done, because if we examine the Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011.
entire history of mankind, more people have “Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The
Effect of Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy.”
died on account of religion than on account
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3
of the stock market.34 This simple fact alone (4): 56–85.
must warrant economists’ continued interest Anderson, Gary M. 1988. “Mr. Smith and the Preach-
ers: The Economics of Religion in the Wealth of
in studying the social and economic conse-
Nations.” Journal of Political Economy 96 (5):
quences of religion. And whether we like 1066–88.
it or not, the fact remains that religion has Anderson, Lisa R., and Jennifer M. Mellor. 2009. “Reli-
gion and Cooperation in a Public Goods Experi-
been a tremendous force throughout history,
ment.” Economics Letters 105 (1): 58–60.
in all corners of the globe, and continues to Andreoni, James. 1989. “Giving with Impure Altruism:
exercise influence. Over the centuries, given Applications to Charity and Ricardian Equivalence.”
Journal of Political Economy 97 (6): 1447–58.
the resources that religions have controlled
Andreoni, James. 1990. “Impure Altruism and Dona-
and their power over individuals and their tions to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow Giv-
minds, we must expect that there would be ing.” Economic Journal 100 (401): 464–77.
Andreoni, James. 2001. “Economics of Philanthropy.”
major economic consequences. Of course,
In International Encyclopedia of the Social and
the methods we use to examine religion will Behavioral Sciences, edited by Neil J. Smelser and
remain scientific, rigorous, and relevant, yet Paul B. Baltes, 11369–76. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Arce, Daniel G., and Todd Sandler. 2003. “An Evolu-
as economists we must also think more about
tionary Game Approach to Fundamentalism and
how such research can be converted into Conflict.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
sound intuition, practical economic ideas, or Economics 159 (1): 132–54.
Arce, Daniel G., and Todd Sandler. 2009. “Fitting In:
social policy that has relevance for the cur-
Group Effects and the Evolution of Fundamental-
rent state of the world’s religions. Going for- ism.” Journal of Policy Modeling 31 (5): 739–57.
ward, economics and religion may need to be Azzi, Corry, and Ronald Ehrenberg. 1975. “Household
Allocation of Time and Church Attendance.” Journal
much closer than some might believe.
of Political Economy 83 (1): 27–56.
Bader, Christopher D., F. Carson Mencken, and James
References Parker. 2006. “Where Have All the Communes
Gone? Religion’s Effect on the Survival of Com-
Abramitzky, Ran. 2008. “The Limits of Equality: munes.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion
Insights from the Israeli Kibbutz.” Quarterly Journal 45 (1): 73–85.
of Economics 123 (3): 1111–59. Barro, Robert J., and Rachel M. McCleary. 2003.
Abramitzky, Ran. 2009. “The Effect of Redistribution “Religion and Economic Growth across Countries.”
on Migration: Evidence from the Israeli Kibbutz.” American Sociological Review 68 (5): 760–81.
Journal of Public Economics 93 (3–4): 498–511. Barro, Robert J., and Rachel M. McCleary. 2005.
Abramitzky, Ran. 2011. “On the (Lack of) Stability “Which Countries Have State Religions?” Quarterly
of Communes: An Economic Perspective.” In The Journal of Economics 120 (4): 1331–70.
Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Religion, Barros, Pedro Pita, and Nuno Garoupa. 2002. “An Eco-
edited by Rachel M. McCleary, 169–90. Oxford and nomic Theory of Church Strictness.” Economic Jour-
New York: Oxford University Press. nal 112 (481): 559–76.
Basten, Christoph, and Frank Betz. 2013. “Beyond
Work Ethic: Religion, Individual, and Political Pref-
34 I am grateful to my Cambridge colleague William erences.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Brown for pointing this out to me. Policy 5 (3): 67–91.

--- Page 42 ---
436 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
Bateman, Bradley W., and Ethan B. Kapstein. 1999. Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2000. “‘Beyond the
“Retrospectives: Between God and the Market: The Melting Pot’: Cultural Transmission, Marriage, and
Religious Roots of the American Economic Asso- the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits.” Quar-
ciation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (4): terly Journal of Economics 115 (3): 955–88.
249–58. Borooah, Vani K., and Sriya Iyer. 2005. “Vidya, Veda,
Becker, Gary S., and Kevin M. Murphy. 2000. Social and Varna: The Influence of Religion and Caste on
Economics: Market Behavior in a Social Environ- Education in Rural India.” Journal of Development
ment. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Studies 41 (8): 1369–1404.
Becker, Sascha O., Francesco Cinnirella, and Ludger Botticini, Maristella, and Zvi Eckstein. 2001. “Reli-
Woessmann. 2010. “The Trade-Off between Fertility gious Norms, Human Capital, and Money Lending
and Education: Evidence from Before the Demo- in Jewish European History.” In Oxford Handbook
graphic Transition.” Journal of Economic Growth 15 of the Economics of Religion, edited by Rachel M.
(3): 177–204. McCleary, 57–80. Oxford and New York: Oxford Uni-
Becker, Sascha O., Markus Nagler, and Ludger Woess- versity Press.
mann. 2014. “Education Promoted Secularization.” Botticini, Maristella, and Zvi Eckstein. 2005. “Jewish
University of Warwick Centre for Competitive Occupational Selection: Education, Restrictions, or
Advantage in the Global Economy Working Paper Minorities?” Journal of Economic History 65 (4):
186. 922–48.
Becker, Sascha O., and Ludger Woessmann. 2009. Botticini, Maristella, and Zvi Eckstein. 2011. “Reli-
“Was Weber Wrong? A Human Capital Theory of gious Norms, Human Capital, and Money Lending
Protestant Economic History.” Quarterly Journal of in Jewish European History.” In The Oxford Hand-
Economics 124 (2): 531–96. book of the Economics of Religion, edited by Rachel
Becker, Sascha O., and Ludger Woessmann. 2013. “Not M. McCleary, 57–80. Oxford and New York: Oxford
the Opium of the People: Income and Secularization University Press.
in a Panel of Prussian Countries.” American Eco- Bowles, Samuel. 1998. “Endogenous Preferences: The
nomic Review 103 (3): 539–44. Cultural Consequences of Markets and Other Eco-
Beckworth, David. 2009. “Praying for a Recession: nomic Institutions.” Journal of Economic Literature
The Business Cycle and Protestant Religiosity in the 36 (1): 75–111.
United States.” http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. Buser, Thomas. 2014. “The Effect of Income on Reli-
cfm?abstract_id=1103142. giousness.” CESifo Working Paper 4801.
Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Belief in a Calvacanti, Tiago V., Stephen L. Parente, and Rui Zhao.
Just World and Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly 2007. “Religion in Macroeconomics: A Quantitative
Journal of Economics 121 (2): 699–746. Analysis of Weber’s Thesis.” Economic Theory 32 (1):
Berger, Peter L. 1963. “A Market Model for the Anal- 105–23.
ysis of Ecumenicity.” Social Research 30 (1): 77–93. Campante, Filipe, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. 2013.
Berger, Peter L. 1967. The Sacred Canopy: Elements “Does Religion Affect Economic Growth and Hap-
of a Sociological Theory of Religion. New York: piness? Evidence from Ramadan.” Harvard Univer-
Doubleday. sity John F. Kennedy School of Government Faculty
Berman, Eli. 2000. “Sect, Subsidy, and Sacrifice: An Research Working Paper RWP13-052.
Economist’s View of Ultra-Orthodox Jews.” Quar- Carvalho, Jean-Paul. 2013. “Veiling.” Quarterly Journal
terly Journal of Economics 115 (3): 905–53. of Economics 128 (1): 337–70.
Berman, Eli. 2009. Radical, Religious, and Violent: The Carvalho, Jean-Paul, and Mark Koyama. 2013. “Resist-
New Economics of Terrorism. Cambridge, MA and ing Education.” George Mason University Depart-
London: MIT Press. ment of Economics Working Paper 13-18.
Berman, Eli, Laurence R. Iannaccone, and Giuseppe Cerqueti, Roy, Luca Correani, and Giuseppe Garofalo.
Ragusa. 2014. “From Empty Pews to Empty Cra- 2013. “Economic Interactions and Social Tolerance:
dles: Fertility Decline among European Catholics.” A Dynamic Perspective.” Economics Letters 120 (3):
National Bureau of Economic Research Working 458–63.
Paper 18350. Cesur, Resul, and Naci Mocan. 2014. “Does Secular
Berman, Eli, and David D. Laitin. 2004. “Rational Mar- Education Impact Religiosity, Electoral Participation
tyrs vs. Hard Targets: Evidence on the Tactical Use of and the Propensity to Vote for Islamic Parties? Evi-
Suicide Attacks.” Paper presented at the Meetings of dence from an Education Reform in a Muslim Coun-
the Association for the Study of Religion, Economics try.” Koc University-Tusiad Economic Research
and Culture, October 22. Forum Working Paper 1422.
Berman, Eli, and David D. Laitin. 2008. “Religion, Ter- Chaney, Eric. 2013. “Revolt on the Nile: Economic
rorism and Public Goods: Testing the Club Model” Shocks, Religion, and Political Power.” Econometrica
Journal of Public Economics 92 (10–11): 1942–67. 81 (5): 2033–53.
Binzel, Christine, and Jean-Paul Carvalho. 2013. “Edu- Chaudhary, Latika, and Jared Rubin. 2011. “Reading,
cation, Social Mobility and Religious Movements: A Writing, and Religion: Institutions and Human Cap-
Theory of the Islamic Revival in Egypt.” Institute for ital Formation.” Journal of Comparative Economics
the Study of Labor Discussion Paper 7259. 39 (1): 17–33.

--- Page 43 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 437
Chaudhary, Latika, and Jared Rubin. 2013. “Religious Epstein, Gil S., and Ira N. Gang. 2007. “Understand-
Identity and the Provision of Public Goods: Evidence ing the Development of Fundamentalism.” Public
from the Indian Princely States.” Chapman Univer- Choice 132 (3): 257–71.
sity Economic Science Institute Working Paper Eswaran, Mukesh. 2011. “Competition and Perfor-
13-26. mance in the Marketplace for Religion: A Theoret-
Chaves, Mark. 2004. Congregations in America. Cam- ical Perspective.” BE Journal of Economic Analysis
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. and Policy 11 (1).
Chen, Daniel L. 2010. “Club Goods and Group Iden- Evans, John H., and Michael S. Evans. 2008. “Religion
tity: Evidence from Islamic Resurgence during the and Science: Beyond the Epistemological Conflict
Indonesian Financial Crisis.” Journal of Political Narrative.” Annual Review of Sociology 34: 87–105.
Economy 118 (2): 300–354. Ferrero, Mario. 2005. “Radicalization as a Reaction to
Chen, Daniel L., and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2014. Failure: An Economic Model of Islamic Extremism.”
“Economics, Religion, and Culture: A Brief Intro- Public Choice 122 (1): 199–220.
duction.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Orga- Finke, Roger. 1990. “Religious Deregulation: Origins
nization 104: 1–3. and Consequences.” Journal of Church and State 32
Chiswick, Barry R. 2005. The Economics of Immigra- (3): 609–26.
tion: Selected Papers of Barry R. Chiswick. Chelten- Finke, Roger. 2004. “Innovative Returns to Tradition:
ham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. Using Core Teachings as the Foundation for Inno-
Chiswick, Carmel U. 2006. “An Economic Perspective vative Accommodation.” Journal for the Scientific
on Religious Education: Complements and Sub- Study of Religion 43 (1): 19–34.
stitutes in a Human Capital Portfolio.” Research in Finke, Roger. 2013. “Origins and Consequences of
Labor Economics 24: 449–67. Religious Freedoms: A Global Overview.” Sociology
Chiswick, Carmel U. 2014. Judaism in Transition: How of Religion 74 (3): 297–313.
Economic Choices Shape Religious Tradition. Stan- Finke, Roger, and Rodney Stark. 1988. “Religious
ford: Stanford University Press. Economies and Sacred Canopies: Religious Mobili-
Christiano, Kevin J., William H. Swatos, Jr., and Peter zation in American Cities, 1906.” American Sociolog-
Kivisto. 2008. Sociology of Religion: Contemporary ical Review 53 (1): 41–49.
Developments, Second edition. Lanham, MD: Row- Finke, Roger, and Rodney Stark. 1992. The Churching
man and Littlefield Publishers. of America: 1776–2005: Winners and Losers in Our
Clingingsmith, David, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Michael Religious Economy. New Brunswick: Rutgers Uni-
Kremer. 2009. “Estimating the Impact of the Hajj: versity Press.
Religion and Tolerance in Islam’s Global Gathering.” Fox, Jonathan, and Ephraim Tabory. 2008.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3): 1133–70. “ Contemporary Evidence Regarding the Impact of
Deaton, Angus. 2011. “Aging, Religion, and Health.” State Regulation of Religion on Religious Participa-
In Explorations in the Economics of Aging, edited by tion and Belief.” Sociology of Religion 69 (3): 245–71.
David A. Wise, 237–62. Chicago and London: Uni- Freud, Sigmund. 1927. The Future of an Illusion. Lon-
versity of Chicago Press. don: Hogarth Press.
Dehejia, Rajeev, Thomas DeLeire, and Erzo F. P. Lutt- Friedman, Benjamin M. 2005. The Moral Conse-
mer. 2007. “Insuring Consumption and Happiness quences of Economic Growth. New York: Random
through Religious Organizations.” Journal of Public House, Alfred A. Knopf.
Economics 91 (1–2): 259–79. Friedman, Benjamin M. 2011. “Economics: A Moral
Durkheim, Emile. 1912. Les Forms Elementaires de la Inquiry with Religious Origins. American Economic
vie Religieuse/The Elementary Forms of the Religious Review 101 (3): 166–70.
Life. Translated by Joseph Ward Swain. London: Friedman, Daniel. 2008. Morals and Markets: An Evo-
George Allen and Unwin, 1915. lutionary Account of the Modern World. New York:
Durlauf, Steven N., Andros Kourtellos, and Chih Ming St. Martin’s Press, Palgrave Macmillan.
Tan. 2012. “Is God in the Details? A Reexamination Gagnon, Julien. 2014. “With God We Trust: Religion,
of the Role of Religion in Economic Growth.” Jour- Trust and Cooperation in Large-Scale Societies.”
nal of Applied Econometrics 27 (7): 1059–75. University of Cambridge Working Paper in Econom-
Einstein, Albert. 1950. Out of My Later Years. New ics 1406.
York: Carol Publishing Group, Citadel Press, 1956. Gentzkow, Matthew A., and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2004.
Ekelund, Robert B., Jr., Robert F. Hebert, and Rob- “Media, Education and Anti-Americanism in the
ert D. Tollison. 2002. “An Economic Analysis of the Muslim World.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18
Protestant Reformation.” Journal of Political Econ- (3): 117–33.
omy 110 (3): 646–71. Gill, Anthony. 1998. Rendering unto Caesar: The Cath-
El-Gamal, Mahmoud A. 2006. Islamic Finance: Law, olic Church and the State in Latin America. Chicago
Economics and Practice. Cambridge and New York: and London: University of Chicago Press.
Cambridge University Press. Gill, Anthony. 2007. The Political Origins of Religious
Engelberg, Joseph, Raymond Fisman, Jay C. Hartzell, Liberty. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge Uni-
and Christopher A. Parsons. 2014. “Human Capital versity Press.
and the Supply of Religion.” Unpublished. Glaeser, Edward L. 2005. “The Political Economy of

--- Page 44 ---
438 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
Hatred.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (1): Hirschman, Albert O. 1977. The Passions and the
45–86. Interests: Political Arguments for Capitalism before
Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto, and Its Triumph. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton Uni-
Jesse M. Shapiro. 2005. “Strategic Extremism: Why versity Press.
Republicans and Democrats Divide on Religious Hout, Michael, and Claude S. Fischer. 2002. “Why
Values.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (4): More Americans Have No Religious Preference:
1283–1330. Politics and Generations.” American Sociological
Glewwe, Paul, Phillip H. Ross, and Bruce Wydick. Review 67 (2): 165–90.
2014. “Developing Aspirations: The Impact of Hout, Michael, Claude S. Fischer, and Mark A. Chaves.
Church-Affiliated Child Sponsorship on Self-Esteem 2013. “More Americans Have No Religious Prefer-
and Life Expectations.” Unpublished. ence: Key Findings from the 2012 General Social
Glock, Charles Y., and Rodney Stark. 1965. Religion Survey.” University of California Berkeley Institute
and Society in Tension. Chicago: Rand McNally and for the Study of Societal Issues Working Paper.
Company. Hungerman, Daniel M. 2005. “Are Church and State
Gorski, Philip S. 2005. “The Little Divergence: The Substitutes? Evidence from the 1996 Welfare
Protestant Reformation and Economic Hegemony Reform.” Journal of Public Economics 89 (11–12):
in Early Modern Europe.” In The Protestant Ethic 2245–67.
Turns 100: Essays on the Centenary of the Weber Hungerman, Daniel M. 2011. “Rethinking the Study
Thesis, edited by William H. Swatos, Jr., and Lutz of Religious Markets.” In The Oxford Handbook
Kaelber, 165–90. Boulder and London: Paradigm of the Economics of Religion, edited by Rachel M.
Publishers. McCleary, 257–74. Oxford and New York: Oxford
Greeley, Andrew M. 1962. “Areas of Research on Reli- University Press.
gion and Social Organizations.” American Catholic Hungerman, Daniel M. 2013. “Substitution and
Sociological Review 23 (2): 99–112. Stigma: Evidence on Religious Markets from the
Grim, Brian J., and Roger Finke. 2006. “International Catholic Sex Abuse Scandal.” American Economic
Religion Indexes: Government Regulation, Govern- Journal: Economic Policy 5 (3): 227–53.
ment Favoritism, and Social Regulation of Religion.” Hungerman, Daniel M. 2014a. “Do Religious
Interdisciplinary Journal of Research on Religion 2 Proscriptions Matter? Evidence from a T heory-Based
(1). Test.” Journal of Human Resources 49 (4): 1053–93.
Grim, Brian J., and Roger Finke. 2011. The Price of Hungerman, Daniel M. 2014b. “The Effect of Edu-
Freedom Denied: Religious Persecution and Conflict cation on Religion: Evidence from Compulsory
in the 21st Century. Cambridge and New York: Cam- Schooling Laws.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
bridge University Press. Organization 104: 52–63.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2004. “Pay or Pray? The Impact of Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1992. “Sacrifice and Stigma:
Charitable Subsidies on Religious Attendance.” Jour- Reducing Free-Riding in Cults, Communes, and
nal of Public Economics 88 (12): 2635–55. other Collectives.” Journal of Political Economy 100
Gruber, Jonathan. 2005. “Religious Market Structure, (2): 271–91.
Religious Participation, and Outcomes: Is Religion Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1994. “Why Strict Churches
Good for You?” BE Journal of Economic Analysis Are Strong.” American Journal of Sociology 99 (5):
and Policy 5 (1). 1180–1211.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2007. Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1997. “Toward an Economic
“Faith-Based Charity and Crowd-Out during the Theory of ‘Fundamentalism’.” Journal of Institu-
Great Depression.” Journal of Public Economics 91: tional and Theoretical Economics 153 (1): 100–116.
1043–69. Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1998. “Introduction to the
Gruber, Jonathan, and Daniel M. Hungerman. 2008. Economics of Religion.” Journal of Economic Litera-
“The Church versus the Mall: What Happens When ture 36 (3): 1465–95.
Religion Faces Increased Secular Competition?” Iannaccone, Laurence R., and Eli Berman. 2006.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2): 831–62. “Religious Extremism: The Good, the Bad, and the
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2003. Deadly.” Public Choice 128 (1): 109–29.
“People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Attitudes.” Iannaccone, Laurence R., and Eli Berman. 2008. “Eco-
Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (1): 225–82. nomics of Religion.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary
Gulesci, Selim, and Erik Meyersson. 2013. “For the of Economics, edited by Stephen Durlauf and Law-
Love of the Republic: Education, Religion, and rence Blume. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave
Empowerment.” Unpublished. Macmillan.
Hanson, Gordon H., and Chong Xiang. 2013. “Export- Iannaccone, Laurence R., and Feler Bose. 2011.
ing Christianity: Governance and Doctrine in the “Funding the Faiths: Toward a Theory of Religious
Globalization of US Denominations.” Journal of Finance.” In The Oxford Handbook of the Economics
International Economics 91 (2): 301–20. of Religion, edited by Rachel M. McCleary, 323–42.
Henrich, Joseph, et al. 2010. “Markets, Religion, Com- Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
munity Size, and the Evolution of Fairness and Pun- Iannaccone, Laurence R., and Michael D. Makow-
ishment.” Science 327 (5972): 1480–84. sky. 2007. “Accidental Atheists? Agent-Based

--- Page 45 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 439
Explanations for the Persistence of Religious Region- Differences.” Economic Development and Cultural
alism.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 46 Change 61 (3): 503–38.
(1): 1–16. Lambarraa, Fatima, and Gerhard Riener. 2012. “On
Iannaccone, Laurence R., Derek Neal, Peter Boettke, the Norms of Charitable Giving in Islam: A Field
and Deirdre McCloskey. 2005. “The Economics of Experiment.” Courant Research Centre Discussion
Religion: A Symposium.” Faith and Economics 46: Paper 111.
1–23. Landes, David S. 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of
Iyer, Sriya. 2002. Demography and Religion in India. Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor.
New Delhi: Oxford University Press. New York and London: WW Norton and Company.
Iyer, Sriya. 2008. “Religion and Economic Devel- Lehrer, Evelyn L. 2009. Religion, Economics, and
opment.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Eco- Demography: The Effects of Religion on Education,
nomics, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence Work, and the Family. New York and Abington, UK:
E. Blume. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Routledge.
Macmillan. Lehrer, Evelyn L., and Carmel U. Chiswick. 1993.
Iyer, Sriya, Chander Velu, and Abdul Mumit. 2014. “Religion as a Determinant of Marital Stability.”
“Communication and Marketing of Services By Reli- Demography 30 (3): 385–404.
gious Organizations in India.” Journal of Business Lenski, Gerhard. 1961. The Religious Factor: A Socio-
Research 67 (2): 59–67. logical Study of Religion’s Impact on Politics, Eco-
Iyer, Sriya, Chander Velu, and Melvyn Weeks. 2014. nomics, and Family Life. New York: Doubleday.
“Divine Competition: Religious Organisations and Levy, Gilat, and Ronny Razin. 2012. “Religious Beliefs,
Service Provision in India.” University of Cambridge Religious Participation, and Cooperation.” American
Working Paper in Economics 1409. Economic Journal: Microeconomics 4 (3): 121–51.
Iyigun, Murat. 2008. “Luther and Suleyman.” Quar- Majid, Muhammad Farhan. 2013. “The Persistent
terly Journal of Economics 123 (4): 1465–94. Effects of In Utero Nutrition Shocks over the Life
Iyigun, Murat. 2013. “Lessons from the Ottoman Cycle: Evidence from Ramadan Fasting.” Grand
Harem on Culture, Religion, and Wars.” Economic Challenges Canada Economic Returns to Mitigating
Development and Cultural Change 61 (4): 693–730. Early Life Risks Working Paper 13-05.
Jelen, Ted G., ed. 2002. Sacred Markets, Sacred Cano- Makowsky, Michael D. 2012. “Emergent Extremism in
pies: Essays on Religious Markets and Religious Plu- a Multi-agent Model of Religious Clubs.” Economic
ralism. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. Inquiry 50 (2): 327–47.
Jha, Saumitra. 2013. “Trade, Institutions, and Ethnic Malthus, Thomas R. 1817. An Essay on the Principle
Tolerance: Evidence from South Asia.” American of Population, Fifth edition. London: John Murray.
Political Science Review 107 (4): 806–32. Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics, Book
Keefer, Philip, and Norman Loayza, eds. 2008. Terror- I, 32–33. New York: Prometheus Books, 1997.
ism, Economic Development, and Political Openness. Marty, Martin, and R. Simon Appleby, eds. 1994–2004.
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University The Fundamentalism Project. Chicago and London:
Press. University of Chicago Press.
Kelley, Dean M. 1972. Why Conservative Churches McBride, Michael. 2007. “Club Mormon: Free-Rid-
Are Growing. Harper & Row. ers, Monitoring, and Exclusion in the LDS Church.”
Keuschnigg, Marc, and Jan Schikora. 2014. “The Dark Rationality and Society 19 (4): 395–424.
Side of Leadership: An Experiment on Religious McBride, Michael. 2008. “Religious Pluralism and
Heterogeneity and Cooperation in India.” Journal of Religious Participation: A Game Theoretic Analysis.”
Socio-Economics 48: 19–26. American Journal of Sociology 114 (1): 77–106.
Krueger, Alan B. 2007. What Makes a Terrorist: Eco- McBride, Michael. 2010. “Religious Market Competi-
nomics and the Roots of Terrorism. Princeton and tion in a Richer World.” Economica 77 (305): 148–71.
Oxford: Princeton University Press. McBride, Michael. 2015. “Why Churches Need
Kuran, Timur. 1995. Private Truths, Public Lies: The Free-Riders: Religious Capital Formation and Reli-
Social Consequences of Preference Falsification. gious Group Survival.” Journal of Behavioral and
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Experimental Economics 58: 77–87.
Kuran, Timur. 2004. “Why the Middle East Is Eco- McCleary, Rachel M. 2011a. “The Economics of Reli-
nomically Underdeveloped: Historical Mechanisms gion as a Field of Inquiry.” In The Oxford Handbook
of Institutional Stagnation.” Journal of Economic of the Economics of Religion, edited by Rachel M.
Perspectives 18 (3): 71–90. McCleary, 3–38. Oxford and New York: Oxford Uni-
Kuran, Timur. 2010. The Long Divergence: How versity Press.
Islamic Law Held Back the Middle East. Princeton McCleary, Rachel M., ed. 2011b. The Oxford Hand-
and Oxford: Princeton University Press. book of the Economics of Religion. Oxford and New
Kuran, Timur. 2014. “Islam and Economic Per- York: Oxford University Press.
formance: Historical and Contemporary Links.” McCleary, Rachel M., and Robert J. Barro. 2006.
Unpublished. “Religion and Political Economy in an International
Kuran, Timur, and Anantdeep Singh. 2013. “Economic Panel.” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 45
Modernization in Late British India: Hindu–Muslim (2): 149–75.

--- Page 46 ---
440 Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. LIV (June 2016)
McCleary, Rachel M., and Leonard W. J. van der Kuijp. University Press.
2010. “The Market Approach to the Rise of the Oosterbeek, Hessel, and Bas van der Klaauw. 2013.
Geluk School, 1419–1642.” Journal of Asian Studies “Ramadan, Fasting and Educational Outcomes.”
69 (1): 149–80. Economics of Education Review 34: 219–26.
Mellor, Jennifer M., and Beth A. Freeborn. 2011. Oslington, Paul, ed. 2003. Economics and Religion: Vol-
“Religious Participation and Risky Health Behav- umes 1 and 2. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
iors among Adolescents.” Health Economics 20 (10): Oslington, Paul, ed. 2014. The Oxford Handbook of
1226–40. Christianity and Economics. Oxford and New York:
Meyersson, Erik. 2014. “Islamic Rule and the Empow- Oxford University Press.
erment of the Poor and Pious.” Econometrica 82 (1): Paciotti, Brian, et al. 2011. “Are Religious Individu-
229–69. als More Generous, Trusting, and Cooperative? An
Michalopoulos, Stelios, Alireza Naghavi, and Giovanni Experimental Test of the Effect of Religion on Proso-
Prarolo. 2016. “Islam, Inequality and Pre-industrial ciality.” In The Economics of Religion: Anthropologi-
Comparative Development.” Journal of Develop- cal Approaches, edited by Lionel Obadia and Donald
ment Economics 120: 86–98. C. Wood, 267–305. Bingley, UK: Emerald.
Miller, Kent D. 2002. “Competitive Strategies of Reli- Patel, David S. 2012. “Concealing to Reveal: The Infor-
gious Organizations.” Strategic Management Journal mational Role of Islamic Dress.” Rationality and
23 (5): 435–56. Society 24 (3): 295–323.
Mochrie, Robbie. 2014. “How We Forgot What Adam Pew Research Center Forum on Religion and Pub-
Smith Said about Religion.” Paper presented at the lic Life. 2012. “The Global Religious Lands cape.”
International Economic Association World Con- http://www.pewforum.org/2012/12/18/global-
gress, Dead Sea, Jordan, June 9. religious-landscape-exec/.
Montgomery, James D. 1996. “Contemplations on the Prummer, Anja, and Jan-Peter Siedlarek. 2014. “Insti-
Economic Approach to Religious Behavior.” Ameri- tutions and the Preservation of Cultural Traits.” Uni-
can Economic Review 86 (2): 443–47. versity of Cambridge Institute for New Economic
Montgomery, James D. 2003. “A Formalization and Thinking Working Paper 2014/16.
Test of the Religious Economies Model.” American Pullen, John M. 1981. “Malthus’ Theological Ideas and
Sociological Review 68 (5): 782–809. Their Influence on His Principle of Population.” His-
National Council for Voluntary Organisations and tory of Political Economy 13 (1): 39–54.
Charities Aid Foundation. 2010. “UK Giving Putnam, Robert D., and David E. Campbell. 2010.
2010: An Overview of Charitable Giving in the American Grace: How Religion Divides and Unites
UK, 2009/10.” Charities Aid Foundation, National Us. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Council for Voluntary Organisations, and Office of Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli. 1928. The Religion We
National Statistics. Need. London: Ernest Benn.
Neuman, Shoshana. 2007. “Is Fertility Indeed Related Richardson, Gary, and Michael McBride. 2009. “Reli-
to Religiosity? A Note on: ‘Marital Fertility and Reli- gion, Longevity, and Cooperation: The Case of the
gion in Spain, 1985 and 1999’.” Population Studies Craft Guild.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
61 (2): 219–24. Organization 71 (2): 172–86.
Neuman, Shoshana, and Adrian Ziderman. 1986. “How Rothschild, Emma. 1994. “Adam Smith and the Invis-
Does Fertility Relate to Religiosity: Survey Evidence ible Hand.” American Economic Review 84 (2):
from Israel.” Sociology and Social Research 70 (2): 319–22.
178–80. Rubin, Jared. 2011. “Institutions, the Rise of Com-
Noland, Marcus. 2005. “Religion and Economic Per- merce and the Persistence of Laws: Interest Restric-
formance.” World Development 33 (8): 1215–32. tions in Islam and Christianity.” Economic Journal
Norenzayan, Ara, and Azim F. Shariff. 2008. “The 121 (557): 1310–39.
Origin and Evolution of Religious Prosociality.” Sci- Rubin, Jared. 2014. “Printing and Protestants: An
ence 322 (5898): 58–62. Empirical Test of the Role of Printing in the Refor-
Norris, Pippa, and Ronald Inglehart. 2004. Sacred and mation.” Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (2):
Secular: Religion and Politics Worldwide. Cambridge 270–86.
and New York: Cambridge University Press. Sandler, Todd, and Walter Enders. 2004. “An Economic
North, Charles M., and Carl R. Gwin. 2004. “Religious Perspective on Transnational Terrorism.” European
Freedom and the Unintended Consequences of Journal of Political Economy 20 (2): 301–16.
State Religion.” Southern Economic Journal 71 (1): Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1954. History of Economic
103–17. Analysis. London: Allen and Unwin.
North, Charles M., and Carl R. Gwin. 2014. “The Polit- Smith, Adam. 1759. The Theory of Moral Sentiments,
ical Economy of Church and State.” Unpublished. edited by D. D. Raphael and A. L. Macfie. Oxford:
Olson, Daniel V. A. 2011.”Toward Better Measures Clarendon, 1976.
of Supply and Demand for Testing Theories of Smith, Adam. 1979. An Inquiry into the Nature and
Religious Participation.” In The Oxford Handbook Causes of the Wealth of Nations: Books I–III. New
of the Economics of Religion, edited by Rachel M. York: Penguin, 1776.
McCleary, 135–50. Oxford and New York: Oxford Smith, Vernon L. 2008. Rationality in Economics:

--- Page 47 ---
Iyer: The New Economics of Religion 441
Constructivist and Ecological Forms. Cambridge and Society: Four Chapters of an Unfinished Work.” His-
New York: Cambridge University Press. tory of Political Economy 10 (1): 1–189.
Sosis, Richard, and Eric R. Bressler. 2003. “Coopera- Voas, David. 2007. “The Continuing Secular Transi-
tion and Commune Longevity: A Test of the Costly tion..” In The Role of Religion in Modern Societies,
Signaling Theory of Religion.” Cross-Cultural edited by Detlef Pollack and Daniel V. A. Olson,
Research 37 (2): 211–39. 25–48. New York and London: Taylor and Francis,
Sosis, Richard, and Bradley J. Ruffle. 2004. “Ideology, Routledge.
Religion, and the Evolution of Cooperation: Field Voas, David, Alasdair Crockett, and Daniel V. A. Olson.
Experiments on Israeli Kibbutzim.” In Socioeco- 2002. “Religious Pluralism and Participation: Why
nomic Aspects of Human Behavioral Ecology, edited Previous Research Is Wrong.” American Sociological
by Michael Alvard, 89–117. Bingley, UK: Emerald. Review 67 (2): 212–30.
Stark, Rodney, and William Sims Bainbridge. 1987. A Warner, R. Stephen. 1993. “Work in Progress toward a
Theory of Religion. New York: Peter Lang. New Paradigm for the Sociological Study of Religion
Stark, Rodney, and Roger Finke. 2000. Acts of Faith: in the United States.” American Journal of Sociology
Explaining the Human Side of Religion. Berkeley and 98 (5): 1044–93.
Los Angeles: University of California Press. Weber, Max. 1904. Die protestantische Ethik und der
Stark, Rodney, and Roger Finke. 2002. “Beyond Geist des Kapitalismus/The Protestant Ethic and the
Church and Sect: Dynamics and Stability in Reli- Spirit of Capitalism. London: Routledge.
gious Economics.” In Sacred Markets, Sacred Can- Wills, Garry. 1990. Under God: Religion and American
opies: Essays on Religious Markets and Religious Politics. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Pluralism, edited by Ted G. Jelen, 31–62. Lanham, Wilson, David Sloan. 2002. Darwin’s Cathedral:
MD: Rowman & Littlefield. Evolution, Religion, and the Nature of Society. Chi-
Stark, Rodney, Laurence R. Iannaccone, and Roger cago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Finke. 1996. “Religion, Science, and Rationality.” Woodberry, Robert D. 2011. “Religion and the Spread
American Economic Review 86 (2): 433–37. of Human Capital and Political Institutions: Chris-
Tawney, Richard H. 1926. Religion and the Rise of Cap- tian Missions as a Quasi-natural Experiment.” In
italism. London: Penguin Books. The Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Religion,
Tracey, Paul. 2012. “Religion and Organization: A edited by Rachel M. McCleary, 111–34. Oxford and
Critical Review of Current Trends and Future New York: Oxford University Press.
Directions.” Academy of Management Annals 6 (1): Woodberry, Robert D. 2012. “The Missionary Roots
87–134. of Liberal Democracy.” American Political Science
Trinitapoli, Jenny, and Alexander Weinreb. 2012. Reli- Review 106 (2): 244–74.
gion and AIDS in Africa. Oxford and New York: Yang, Fenggang. 2012. Religion in China: Survival and
Oxford University Press. Revival under Communist Rule. Oxford and New
Viner, Jacob. 1978. “Religious Thought and Economic York: Oxford University Press.

--- Page 48 ---
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without
permission.